


THE SILENCE: WHAT IT IS AND HOW TO USE IT

by

DAVID V. BUSH

Author of "The Fundamentals of Applied Psychology", "Applied Psychology
and Scientific Living", "Practical Psychology and Sex Life", "The
Universality of the Master Mind", "Will Power and Success"

Editor, "Mind Power Plus"






BELOW IS A SERIES OF SIX 25c BOOKLETS

By David V. Bush

Entitled

     1. "How to Demonstrate Prosperity"

     2. "Why Some People Fail in Visualizing--Rules for Visualization"

     3. "The Influence of Suggestion and Auto-Suggestion"

     4. "The Silence, What It Is and How to Use It"

     5. "What to Eat--Scientific Feeding"

     6. "What Is God?"[1]

These sell at 25c each--Four for one dollar. Order a set now and get as
premiums two Wall Motto Poems, artistically printed on beautiful
cardboard, for Home, Office or Business. Check your choice for two Wall
Motto Poems from the list below:

     Pep.
     Old Glory.
     Where is Success?
     Misfits Can Win.
     Pass It Along.
     Lift Your Head.
     Where God is Found.
     The Boss is Watching You.
     What is God?
     Stick To It.
     Charity.
     Think Right.
     Opportunity.
     The Real Success.
     The Bull Dog Grip.
     It's Better to Smile.
     Troubles That Never Came.
     If You Would Be a Friend to Man.





THE SILENCE: What It Is, How To Use It



Approach to the Silence


Wrong thinking produces inharmony in our body, which in turn produces
sickness. Our bodies sometimes are instantly re-harmonized while in the
Silence. In the Silence our minds become passive, open, free and
loving, at which time the Infinite Master of harmony touches the mental
chords of our being and we are well.

Just as the piano can be tuned, so can the mind. Man's body is made up
of twelve octaves the same as in music. All matter is music. All matter
is composed of twelve octaves. Wrong thinking brings inharmony in some
of the octaves of our body. Right thinking tunes these organs, puts
them back into their normal condition.

Boys have their little steel magnets by which they pick up small pieces
of steel, pins and so forth. When overworked, these magnets no longer
attract. Then the boys take their magnets, have them rubbed against
strong magnets or remagnetized with an electric current and their power
is quickly restored--so with our bodies. Mind is the re-electrifier and
re-harmonizer of the octaves into all harmony.

Right thinking, therefore, is the most important thing in life. As a
man thinketh in his heart so is he. Just as a tuning fork near a piano
will respond with a vibration when a key of the same pitch is struck on
the piano nearby, so likewise do the bodies of men respond to proper
stimulus and become in tune. By right thinking man can re-harmonize
himself, can achieve health, success and prosperity.

To enter the Silence one must first establish perfect relaxation in
mind and body. Then as the consciousness is brought from one part of
the body to another the tuning takes place.

If the leader in the Silence should be intoning, there will be many in
the audience who will feel tinkling sensations--vibrations--and often
are instantly healed. They have been instantly re-harmonized. Sometimes
it may take several intonings in the Silence for a complete healing.
Should you have a violent vibration, feel no fear, but thank God for
your healing because the more violent the vibration perhaps the worse
has been your condition and the more surely has the re-harmony begun.
Some people will feel this vibration for hours, even days, throughout
which there is always healing.

Others may not feel the vibration at all, yet if there has been any
inharmony in the bodily organs, these organs are unconscious to the
conscious intoning re-harmonization. Many people who have been healed
of divers and many malignant diseases were at no time conscious of any
vibration. Never be discouraged if you feel no sensation. If you do
feel a vibration, know that you are susceptible and on the high road to
a healing demonstration.

The one intoning may or may not be feeling vibrations.  Religion is the
life of God in the soul of Man. The Silence is the medium by which the
life of God and the soul of man are brought into At-one-ment.

The Silence is a medium by which man comes in a closer touch with the
Infinite; a medium by which man becomes conscious of his nearness to
the Infinite. The Silence is the meeting place where man's spirit links
with God's spirit; where spirit meets spirit and the marvel of His
grace never ceases.

The Silence is another way of praying, which is another way of
concentration. It is another way of visualization.

"As a man thinketh in his heart so is he." In the Silence a man can by
his thoughts change his life, his conditions, his environment, his all.
By right thinking man becomes harmonious. A harmonious man--in tune
with the Infinite--is on the King's highway to health, success,
abundance, prosperity, happiness, love and peace.

By means of wrong thinking our minds are put out of harmony with the
great Infinite spirit of God. "As a man thinketh in his heart so is
he." When wrong thinking becomes right thinking, then man's right
relationship to God is restored. He becomes an open channel for the
influx of the spirit so that whatever demonstration he may desire he
may have.

In the Silence a man may change his thinking as in no other way,
therefore, may change his heart, change his whole being, change his
environment, change every condition to which he was subject.

The human body may be likened to a harp. When man thinks rightly his
body is in tune; but wrong thinking creates inharmony in the body and
produces sickness. Wrong thinking produces inharmony in the mind,
which, of course, disconnects man from rightful association with the
Divine. A man must, therefore, think right. Yet, because of centuries
of erroneous conception of God and of the world, man has been a
negative instead of a positive being, and his unwisdom has reacted upon
the present generation.

We are mental sending and receiving stations. What we receive depends
upon how we are thinking Now. For success, health and happiness we must
in the silent chambers of the soul change our thinking if we are
holding negative or inharmonious thoughts. In the Silence there is
presented to man his greatest opportunity to change his thinking. Wrong
thinking produces inharmony of the body which in turn produces
sickness. If we change to right thinking we have health, success and
happiness. Therefore the Silence when properly used re-harmonizes our
bodies and minds through the simple agency of right thinking.

"There are steps of approach to the Silence. Stillness is one thing and
the Silence is another. One may quiet himself physically and not be
still, and he may be still without entering the Silence. When one
becomes physically and mentally at rest, he is apt to become receptive
to psychic influences; and when these are not desired it is advisable
to protect oneself while mentally negative. One may affirm his Oneness
with God, his being surrounded and protected by the divine Goodness,
and may symbolize this by enveloping himself in thought with the white
light of love or the mellowed tints of sunshine.

"With the senses calmed and unresponsive to the slower vibrations, but
responsive to the quicker ones, a peace and calm pervade one's mind,
and it becomes consciously receptive to higher vibrations of vital
energy. Immune from the lesser harmonies, one opens himself to the
greater ones, which are always seeking avenues of expression. With the
greater influx of the One Life, a sense of power steals over one and he
becomes conscious of increased vigor and vitality.

"In relinquishing specific thoughts, one opens inwardly rather than
outwardly, and becomes receptive to subconscious impressions that are
directed by his conscious affirmation of fundamental Truth. The
subconscious responds by returning to the conscious the logical
sequences of the Truths that have been consciously impressed upon it.
The subconscious follows the lead given to it by the conscious
affirmations of Truth, and it brings back the consciousness of those
Truths in their various ramifications."




Health Silence

Select one or more of the affirmations or formulas below to hold in
thought while in the Silence. You may change or vary these as you
choose:

     Soul is health, spirit is health, God is health, I am
     health. Since there is but one mind, there is but one
     mentality. This mind and mentality is God; God is health. I
     am health.

     "I am whole, perfect, strong, powerful, loving, harmonious
     and happy and what I am myself I desire for everyone else."

     "I am filled with the abundant, intelligent, ever-present life of
     Spirit. It flows through me freely, cleansing, healing, purifying
     and vitalizing every part. I am one with this life and in it I am
     every whit whole."

     "The all-powerful Christ Mind in me dissolves and dissipates
     every adverse thought. My body is the pure and Holy Temple of
     the Living God, and every organ and every function is now
     in Divine Order and Harmony."

     All the organs of my body are functioning normally and I am
     well, whole and complete.

     All is mind, all is God, all is universal energy. I am part
     of creative force and I am health, abundance, joy and peace.

     I am filled, I am thrilled with Life Eternal and I radiate
     that life within to me and without to all.

     Every experience of my life has been for my good and I am
     happy in living.

     God is Spirit. I (use your own name) am life. Life Spirit is
     now flowing through me freely and I am well, whole and
     complete.

     "Be still and know that I am God."

USE THE FOLLOWING AS A BASIS FOR YOUR MEDITATION AS YOU DEMONSTRATE
HEALTH. OF COURSE, YOU MAY USE OTHER THOUGHTS PROVIDED THEY ARE
CONSTRUCTIVE HEALTH THOUGHTS.

You may practice the Silence sitting, reclining, or in bed.

There is no better way to learn how to relax than by going into the
Silence. Are you tense? Let go. Relax.

Then direct the mind to go from one part of the body to another. Take a
deep breath between each change of your consciousness. Be sure to use
the diaphragmatic or abdominal breathing--breathing through the
nostrils, mouth closed until the muscles of the abdomen expand.

The best time to hold the Silence is as you retire at night, and just
as you awaken in the morning.[2] But you should hold your thought at
least three times a day, without stress or strain, without doubt or
worry, passive in mind and body--perfectly relaxed.

Hold the Silence or thought upon retiring at night, awakening in the
morning, and at noon day. Of course, you may take any other time that
is convenient. You may concentrate on the roadway, street car, home or
office, but it is well, if possible, to have one room for your Silence.
Most people in that way will build up stronger vibrations. At noon now
there are all over the world thousands of others holding Silence so
that there is a great combined mental force working together at one
time for success, health, prosperity and happiness, and we therefore
get the benefit of this great vibration.

The more often you hold the Silence without stress or strain, as a
rule, the quicker may be the demonstration.

The real part of me is Spirit, not matter. I believe that this body of
mine is a Tabernacle for the Spirit. The real "I am" within me is
therefore Spirit. The real "me" is Spirit.

This Spirit is the God Spirit. This is what Jesus meant when in the
fourteenth chapter of John and again in the seventeenth chapter of the
same Gospel, speaking to His Disciples He referred to "I in you, you in
Me and We in God."

My Spirit is a part of the God Spirit. God is health, God is
perfection, God is abundance, God is harmonious. Therefore, the real "I
am" is God; the real "I am" is health, perfection, abundance and
harmony.

When I am sick I know that it is the material of me that is sick, not
the God Spirit; it is my _physical_ being which is out of harmony, it
is this Tabernacle of which Paul speaks, housing my spirit, which gives
me pain and suffering. The real "me" is not sick, it is _my body_.

For centuries we have held to a wrong idea of life. We have thought
that life is material; but life is spiritual, it is the invisible
within me which is eternal, which is God. Many still believe that life
is material and matter, instead of mind and spirit. I no longer hold
that conception. I believe that all is mind and Spirit.

Just here is where the healing methods of drugs and the scientist's
explanation of life is so limited. Not until we recognize that life is
really a thing of spirit--not matter but mind--not material but
spiritual--do we come into an understanding of Truth.

Jesus said, "God is Spirit," and on different occasions told His
Disciples that this Spirit was within them as well as within Himself.
Therefore, this same Spirit is within me and this same Spirit is the
God Spirit of health, abundance, happiness, harmony and perfection.

God is all health, all abundance, all harmony, peace and perfection.
Therefore the God Spirit within me is the same. I am sick in body; not
in mind, not in Spirit.

Inasmuch as I cannot conceive of God being sick neither can I conceive
of my Spirit being sick. My spirit is health, perfection and harmony.
My body may not be well, but since mind is all, since this material is
subject to the spiritual, since matter is subject to mind, I believe
and affirm that my  health does not depend upon matter but upon the God
Spirit within me. It depends not upon the material but the spiritual,
upon the God mind within.

Just as wood when made into a violin and properly tuned, will give
forth harmony, so my body, though made in the material, when properly
tuned by mind will give forth harmonious living, perfect health.

As the tree standing in the forest may be made into the violin music
box of harmony, so my body, the material in the forest of matter, may
be put in tune, become harmonious and be raised to perfection by the
Master Musician, God--His mind within me.

God is all health. No one could conceive of God as being sick. I can
visualize only the eternal spirit of the Infinite Father. Perfection
existing in everything and I being a child in Spirit, am well, whole
and complete in Spirit. My real "I am" is well.

Science now asserts that matter is composed of twelve octaves, just as
in music. My body is the composite of these twelve octaves. Science
also says that every cell atom, every electron in my body is
intelligent.

This spirit of mine is housed in the Tabernacle of the body which is
composed of millions and millions of cells, all of which having
intelligence respond in my body according to the way I think. Every
word I entertain, every thought I hold, influences everyone of the
millions of cells making up this Tabernacle.

My body is made whole and complete physically. That is, all the cells
of my body are made over new every eleven months. The body I have today
is not the body I had eleven months ago. I get a new body every eleven
months and my body is today what my thinking was yesterday, the day
before that and the months before that. My body in the future depends
upon my thinking in the future. I am what I think I am.

When I affirm that I am well, whole and complete; that I am perfect,
harmonious and strong, I am suggesting to every atom in my body
perfection and every atom in turn begins to make my body over, new in
health and and in perfection.

I may or I may not have to wait for the element of time to make over
every cell. That may be done spontaneously and instantly. There is no
limitation to the power of God so I shall not set a time limit for my
healing, knowing that all things are possible with the Father. I affirm
that now I have that which I desire. I know that now the Spirit of
divine health is surging through me, touching and reaching every atom
of my body and that now the God Spirit within me is perfect and that
Spirit makes my body perfect.

"Man is a Spiritual Being. Man expresses himself mentally and manifests
himself physically. The One Life animates all that exists. Harmony of
existence depends upon the polarities of the three aspects of life. The
mind is at ease when open to the inflow of the Spirit. It is discordant
when it follows sensory impressions. The body is healthy when
responsive to the direction of the spiritualized mind. It becomes
diseased when it accepts the physical as its guide. One achieves mental
ease and physical health through his mental polarity. If open to the
physical and closed to the spiritual, discord will prevail. If open to
the spiritual and closed to the physical, he lives the One Life, in
mental ease and physical health. I open my mind to the inflow of the
Spirit. I place my body under the control of my spiritualized mind. I
feel the One Life animate my mind and my body. I AM a Spiritual Being.
I AM Perfect Health!"

       *       *       *       *       *



Miscellaneous Silence[3]

THOUGHT TO HOLD IN THE SILENCE FOR ABUNDANCE

(See also Abundance, page 23)

"The Universal Abundant Spirit Supplies All My Needs."

There is no want or limitation in the law. If, perchance, there should
appear to be lack of, or need of, abundance in our lives, it is because
of wrong thinking--not because there is a lack of abundance. Therefore,
we should enter the Silence with the profound faith and conviction that
the world is filled with plenty, and that all our needs are most
bountifully supplied.

The mind should be saturated with the conviction that all life is
filled with abundance--all space is overflowing with abundance--all
living comes from an abundant source of supply.

In a Universe where this is true, there can be no want, no lack for you
or yours (for me or mine).

As you take your exercises this month, take the affirmation above. As
you walk on the street to your office, or place of business, continue
this thought. As you go about your daily duties in the home or
workshop, let the mind be saturated with a spirit, a feeling and
thinking of abundance--"The opulence of the Universal Source of Supply
now meets all my needs," "The Abundant Life Giving Spirit of Prosperity
now leads and guides me into the paths of plenty, peace and power," "My
mind is filled with prosperous thoughts, my being is pulsating in
abundant rhythm, my soul is uplifted and sustained by a thousand
thoughts of ever-present abundance, prosperity and opulence."

As these thoughts are maintained and repeated again and again, absorbed
and sunk deep into the subconscious mind, know that all of your needs
are this minute supplied. Know that you could not ask for anything from
the Universal Spirit--Father, God--without that Spirit being most
willing to supply, instantly, all your needs. The spirit and body are
well, but the flesh is weak. Allow your flesh to be stimulated, and
your body to respond by thoughts of abundance, prosperity and opulence.

"I am now rich in thought, rich in body and rich in spirit. I am now
part of the abundant ever-present spirit of prosperity and opulence.
All that I need is now mine, mine, mine."

The Universal Abundant Spirit supplies all my needs.

       *       *       *       *       *



THOUGHT TO HOLD IN MEDITATION IN THE SILENCE

FOR MISFORTUNES, GRIEF, MISTAKES, REVERSES, FAILURE, SORROW, LOSS AND
DISAPPOINTMENT

"All is Good."

We are entering upon a new consciousness for the human race, a higher
plane of mentality, and a greater development of the spiritual life.

In spirit, of course, there is no wrong, no sorrow, no grief, no
misfortune, no losses, no reverses. In short all is perfection.

The age in which we are living has not yet developed this spiritual
understanding. We are still of the earth--earthly--and we are still in
that consciousness where the physical is affected by seeming
misfortunes, reverses, sorrows, griefs, trouble, sickness, etc. We may
be wise in not expecting that suddenly this generation of man will
reach that spiritual plane where there will be no recognition of
anything except good.

We are a part of the Infinite Spirit ourselves and, of course, in
spirit, we are perfection. But this physical body of ours manifests
imperfection from time to time, because of our past training and past
thinking, because of our own consciousness. In time there is no doubt
in my mind but that the spirit within will make a perfect body without.
This perfection will be recognized in health and in peace of mind. It
will be recognized so that there will be no such thing as misfortunes,
sorrows, reverses, failures, griefs, disappointments or losses being
able to affect our mentality or our body. In this state of
consciousness, as we are emerging from the chrysalis, material stage of
man into the greater life, into the deeper spiritual understanding, we
are subject to certain conditions not conducive to peace of mind
without an effort. In other words, we recognize, or feel the effects of
losses, misfortunes, disappointments, sorrows, griefs, etc. We
recognize now, that the time is coming when the spirit will be so
completely in control of matter in the body, that we will not recognize
any inharmony. To reach that Great Spirit is one of the big forward
steps in this generation. To reach that spiritual plane also means the
right kind of thinking now. We plan, today, for tomorrow. This is true
in every walk of life.

We plan our home today--and build it tomorrow. We make our merchandise
today and market it tomorrow. We sow our seed today and we reap the
harvest tomorrow. We build our career today, little by little, and we
reach the outcome tomorrow. Therefore, our thinking today will change
our tomorrow. The thinking of this generation will change the condition
of tomorrow's generation. If tomorrow's generation is going to be free
from the recognition of sorrows, misfortunes, griefs, fears, pain,
losses, failures, reverses, inharmony, discord, etc., it depends upon
our seed sowing.

Our seed sowing today should be "All is Good." All is Good in spirit.
You can say that and be honest with yourself. All is perfection in
spirit. All is good for us in spirit. All is good for our lives here.
Spirit transcends matter. When we recognize, affirm, and continue to
hold the constructive thought that All is Good in spirit, we are
changing our own mental attitude, our own bodies, all matter in
general--getting ready for the greater realization of the spiritual
manifestation in the next generation.

Therefore, for your own good here today in success, prosperity and
happiness as well as in health, peace and harmony, begin to pronounce
over everything in life, _All is Good_. If you have any
misunderstandings, _All is Good_. If you have any losses, _All is
Good_, any reverses, _All is Good_, any sorrow, _All is Good_, any
inharmony, _All is Good_. In everything at all that is out of
perfection you must recognize only the good. ALL IS GOOD.

Sending your thought energy by repeating _All is Good_, and thinking
_All is Good_, and living _All is Good_, you will actually, in this
day, overcome your difficulty, and turn all of your mistakes, blunders
and misfortunes into stepping stones for your own success, health and
happiness.

I enter the Silence this month, this day, this hour and this minute. My
mind is obsessed and under control of the Divine Spirit, I recognize
here and now only good. I see in my fellowmen only perfection and good.
I see in nature all around me only perfection and good. I see in every
transaction of life only the perfect good. I see in every activity of
my experience, and in every form, color and thought, good. _All is
Good_ for me now, today and forever.

God is spirit; spirit is love; love is perfection; God's spirit is
harmonious, I am perfect, I am love, perfection and harmonious.

ALL IS GOOD.

       *       *       *       *       *



FOR HARMONY, PEACE, COMFORT


Base your thought for this Silence upon the following. You may add any
constructive thought you choose.

"My Subconscious Mind, I Desire and Command You to Have Peace, Harmony
and Justice Reign in the Hearts of Men Everywhere."

I realize that there can be no negative thinking for my destruction,
downfall or harm sent out by anyone else that can reach my
consciousness, or do me ill, unless I am afraid that such negative
thinking will produce the evil effects others are planning.

I know that Thought is Energy. This is scientifically demonstrated, and
I realize that a constructive thought has much more energy than a
destructive thought. I know, because it has been conclusively proven,
that constructive thinking will blast away every negative
thought-current sent out by one person, or by a thousand.

Therefore, if there should be any inharmonious thoughts anywhere in the
world--any discordant thought-current by those who seek my downfall, or
block my progress, or by those who would endeavor to hurt my
reputation--I know that by holding a harmonious attitude of peace,
love, joy and success for everyone, including those who would do me
wrong that such constructive thought-currents will blast away all of
the discordant and inharmonious mental currents of evil so that they
will not even reach my conscious mind.

I also realize, when I hold my silent thought, "_my subconscious mind I
desire and command you to have peace and harmony and justice reign_,"
that I am sending out the energy of construction which is bound to turn
all of the efforts for my embarrassment and destruction into a higher
current for my greater achievement.

Therefore, I send out blessings and thanksgiving to the very ones who
would work my downfall. I charge my subconscious mind to let peace,
harmony and justice reign so that all things will work together for the
good for me and for those who are thinking evil.

If I should think it hard to send out blessings to my enemies, I
remember the affirmation of the Greatest Teacher of all ages Who said,
"Forgive until seventy times seven." I remember that when He, Himself,
was reviled, reviled not in turn. I remember that when His merciless
enemies had nailed Him to the cross, had apparently crushed His fondest
ambition, had scorned and reviled the Kingdom of which He had spoken,
and had tortured Him as He hung on the cross, He uttered the immortal,
lovable, constructive words which have rung throughout the centuries,
and will continue to bless all mankind throughout eternity: "Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do."

So those who would try to block my way, curb my progress or put thorns
in my crown are doing so "not knowing what they are doing." "Whatsoever
a man soweth, that shall he also reap." Instead of hurting me, they are
sowing weed seeds, which shall bring forth a harvest of weeds and tares
in their own lives, and not in mine.

I, therefore, do not wish them harm, nor think that they should feel
the reaction. I do not have to concern myself about the negative people
in the world--for the law takes care of them.

I shall always think constructive thoughts, harmonious thoughts and
loving thoughts. "My Subconscious Mind, I desire and command you to
have peace, harmony and justice reign, and know that all things are now
working together for the good of my would-be enemies and for myself."

I relax (here pause and wait), take time for meditation (here pause and
rest relaxed) and I become happy in the silence--holding my thought of
peace, harmony and justice reigning in the hearts of men
everywhere--and, as I relax and wait, I feel my vibrations rise. I am
resting at ease, in faith. (Pause.) I am perfectly calm and contented.
(Pause.) I am sending out love, peace and harmonious thoughts, and, as
they go, love, peace and harmony will come to me. These are now
returning. They enter my being and uplift my soul.

I am, therefore, sending out a strong current of spiritual blessings,
with such a spirit of helpfulness, that I am getting back the same
which I send out. My harvest shall be peace, love, joy, harmony,
justice and contentment, because I am _sowing_ the seed of love, peace,
harmony, joy, contentment and justice into the great subconscious soil
of the universe.

"My Subconscious Mind, I desire and command you to have peace, harmony
and justice reign everywhere throughout the world."

I wait--I rest--I am relaxed--I am at ease and filled with the spirit
of harmony. I wait. I listen for the spirit within. I feel and hear the
voice of infinite love sending back into my consciousness these
thoughts which I send out.

I know that my every constructive thought blasts away a thousand
destructive ones. Therefore, I think peace, joy, love, harmony and
justice, and, as I utter these words slowly and prayerfully, I feel my
vibration rising--I experience ease of mind and peace of soul. Harmony
is now within and without.

I realize that I cannot send out my affirmation of peace, love, joy and
harmony without peace, love, joy and harmony coming back to me. I,
therefore, send out my affirmation: "My Subconscious Mind, I desire and
command you to have peace, harmony and justice reign-in the hearts of
men wherever they may be." I wait and listen--perfectly relaxed and at
ease--and I feel the vibrations which I sent out coming back to me.

I, therefore, know that no harm can befall my dwelling place. I know
that whatever evil thoughts have been sent out for my destruction have
been counter-blasted, and that now everything is working for my good.

As I recognize, and realize, that all things work together for my good,
I am sending out love-thoughts that all things are working together for
the good of those who would do me wrong. "They know not what they do."
They alone will have to reap the harvest of the weeds they are sowing.
My wish for them is that they may learn their lesson easily and early.
My blessings I send out to them.

Again I wait. Again I listen. Again I am at ease, happy, and at rest.
Love and blessings, peace and harmony, I send out--love and blessings,
peace and harmony, come back. "My Subconscious Mind, I desire and
command you to have peace, harmony and justice reign. My blessings upon
all mankind--my love to everyone!"

       *       *       *       *       *



THOUGHT TO HOLD AS A BASIS FOR THIS SILENCE

FOR SUCCESS

"I Have Faith and Conviction in My Ultimate Success."

I believe the Scripture: "My ways are not your ways, saith the Lord;
neither are my thoughts your thoughts, for as the heavens are higher
than the earth, so are my thoughts higher than your thoughts."

I understand by this Scripture that the thoughts of the Infinite God
are far above the understanding of finite me; that God's ways are
higher than my ways. "God moves in a mysterious way His wonders to
perform."

I also have faith and conviction in my ultimate success because I am a
part of the Infinite Spirit, and in the Infinite Spirit, there can be
no failure. I am harmonious, complete and successful in Spirit--in God.

I may not see my success today, or I may feel as though I have
accomplished little, but I know that all my efforts and energies, in
the past, present and future, are working together for my good.

Therefore, I shall hold the thought that my success has already been
achieved. I am Success, I have success now and forever! Therefore, I
think only success; I talk only success; I believe only in success; I
am demonstrating success, and I know that success is mine.

The needed lessons I am having now, have had in the past, and may
require in the future, are but necessary stepping stones to my greater
success. The apparent delay of my greater success means that I am now
demonstrating more success than I could otherwise have. Dreams that I
have dreamed, visions that I have visualized, and the goal that I have
mapped out, are all a part of my ultimate greater success. I have that
now! I am successful now!

As Moses went into the land of Midian, and spent forty years of his
life as a shepherd in the wilderness--(apparently with no future before
him--which, however, was the great schooling necessary for his greater
triumphant success in the future)--so I may be, in _my_ land of Midian,
apparently, only a sheep herder, but in reality getting the necessary
training for my greater and ultimate success.

Therefore, I now rejoice in every experience I have--giving thanks for
every apparent set back, and for every "seeming" blocking of my
purposes and aspirations.

I believe that my past experiences, as well as present happenings, are
for my benefit, and that I could not have been the great success I am,
and shall be, had not the discouragements of yesterday, the
perplexities of today and the drawbacks of tomorrow come into my life.
I realize that I need to go into the land of Midian; that it is as
necessary for me, as it was for Moses, to spend a few years in the
wilderness of Life's experience. I am happy to know that I am in such
company as that of the Great Leader of his people, and rejoice in the
thought that the Lord has called me to spend my time in the land of
Midian, getting the necessary training for the greater things the Lord
has in store for me.

There is no place in the world where clouds do not gather, and storms
do not rage; but when the storms abate, and the skies clear, then do we
appreciate more fully the glories and beauties of God, the Universe and
its natural laws, and Infinite Love.

However, I know by experience in the land of Midian, where clouds hover
low, and where storms try the soul and body, that the dawn of a new day
shall make life all the sweeter for me and mine.

Moses could not have enjoyed leading his people into the promised land,
had he not been in the land of Midian. If he had stayed forever in the
Court of Pharaoh, with its attendant luxuries, life would have taken on
a dull, monotonous hue, and his experience would have seemed drab,
wearisome and pale.

I am glad for the privilege accorded me to be in the land of Midian for
a short time! I know that, as did Moses, I shall enjoy my promised land
all the more when my greater success shall have been well worked out by
the hand of Divinity.

Faith and conviction in my ultimate greater success is stronger today
than ever! I hold such a strong thought, and such a deep and courageous
faith in the workings of God's plan, that I know I now have that which
has been intended for me, and nothing can take from me that which the
Lord hath prepared for my success, health and happiness. I know, too,
that I shall learn daily to enjoy, appreciate, and make better use of
the success I now possess; that I shall unfold day by day into greater
opportunities for more influence, power, friendship, charity, love,
comradeship and service. I know that my present success is but a part
of the greater success which the Lord has waiting for me--"just around
the corner".

Therefore, I shall offer up prayers of thanksgiving and gratitude; I
shall work harder, being more particular in the preparation for my
greater work, than I have been in the past--never doubting but that
every moment spent in this greater preparation will bring added
interests, and a greater success in the future.

Even as Moses did not doubt the wisdom of the Lord for a greater future
(when in the land of Midian for forty years), so shall I not doubt His
ways today.

I claim, with a joyful heart and an attitude of thanksgiving, that my
life could not have been as great in the future had I been denied my
present experience. I know that greater things are in store for me,
because God's thoughts are greater than my thoughts; because He is
giving me that training now, in my land of Midian, which I most need. I
trust the guiding Spirit of Infinite Love to lead me, at the right
time, into my life's Promised Land.

The success today, in my land of Midian, is attracting unto me the
greater influence and power in my Court of Pharaoh, and in my
leadership, as I lead others into that promised land which the Lord has
prepared for me and mine.

I smile--I sing--I rejoice, and offer thanksgiving and gratitude for my
success now and forever. Surely I believe more and more: "My thoughts
are not your thoughts, neither are my ways your ways, saith the Lord,"
and all things are now working together for my good.

Therefore, I have faith and conviction in my ultimate success--in my
greater success--in my greatest success!

       *       *       *       *       *



ABUNDANCE

(See also Abundance, page 11)

"There is abundance in the world for me given by the bountiful hand of
Omnipotence. I gratefully claim and accept all the supply for my
needs."

The old idea of orthodox prayer was that of supplication and begging. I
have spent a whole night at a time begging for a few pennies and
supplicating for the salvation of others. What waste of energy. Each
time that we send up such a weak supplication as the attitude of a
beggar, with the timid, frightful thoughts that only a beggar's mind
can have--this condition of mind, cross circuits the power to bring
into our lives the very things we most desire.

When the beggar extends his hand for a copper, he knows that not
everyone who passes is going to give him a coin. He, therefore,
solicits more or less mechanically, with a mind not positive or sure.
His hand is extended in timidity and weakness. Now and then he gets a
coin from a sympathetic passer-by. The same principle holds true for
the man who prays in the old orthodox fashion. He utters his petitions
with doubts and misgivings, with timidity and wonderings. Some of his
prayers are answered--just as the occasional coin is cast to the
beggar. But most of the orthodox prayers sent up in the fashion of
begging and supplicating are never answered. Of necessity, they cannot
be, because the concentration is filled with fear and trembling.

Only by positive and courageous thinking do we attract to ourselves the
answers to our prayers. When we are permeated with the spirit of doubt,
our petitions are cross-circuited.

Therefore, in making your affirmation this time, rest assured that the
abundant spirit of the Universal Supply has everything you need, and
has it now. You have only to put your mind in a condition to receive.

You do not have to beg the sun for its rays, nor God for His love. It
is there for the taking. Many of us keep the sunshine of abundance out
of our lives by pulling down the curtain of doubt--just as we may go
into a room, pull down a shade and keep out the sun. James Russell
Lowell, seventy-five years ago, told us the same story in "The Vision
of Sir Launfal," when he said that "Heaven is given away and God may be
had for the asking".

By gratefully accepting all of the supply for your needs, you are
running up the shade of positive faith and letting the sunlight of
abundance in.

Send out the desire for your supply to the Universal Mind and then
rest--feeling that it has been acquired. Of course, the stronger you
concentrate, without stress and strain (as outlined in "Practical
Psychology and Sex Life," by the author, under the chapter "How to get
what you want," and chapters on "Concentration"), and the more positive
and courageous your concentration, the stronger will be your mental
thought currents and consequently the quicker your demonstration.

_Omnipotence has provided for me and mine_, I raise the shade of my
faith and let in the Sunlight of Abundance. I know I do not have to beg
for this, for it is mine now. When first I saw the light of day, the
bountiful spirit of the Father made all preparations for my life's
necessities and pleasures. They have been in the world since I was
born. I now claim and accept my supply.

From now on the spirit goes before me--making easy and prosperous all
my ways--and I have abundance for every need. From the bountiful hand
of Omnipotence I have abundant health--I have abundant love--I have
abundant prosperity--I have abundant peace. My Father careth for the
grass of the field and the birds of the air--and He careth for me. I
realize it.

Think it and live it now.

Abundance for all my needs is mine, now and forever.

       *       *       *       *       *



HEALTH, SUCCESS, PROSPERITY, UNIVERSAL PEACE AND BROTHERHOOD

"God Made From One Blood All the Nations of the World."

As I enter the Silence this time, expecting to get health, success,
prosperity and happiness, I am going to have my mind filled with the
Spirit of Divine Unity. Unity among the nations of the world, unity in
abundance, unity in love, unity in prosperity, unity in health and
unity in spirit.

There can be no separation in Spirit. All is Mind, all is God, all is
Universal Energy. I am part of the creative force. I am a part and
parcel of the Unity of Love, Nature and God. Therefore, where God is, I
recognize a completeness. And I, being a part of God, a part of this
spirit, a part of the power with Him, am, therefore, at one with God
and all thought.

I am therefore at one with God and all spirit. Nothing can separate me
from the love of God, but my own mental attitude. Nothing can separate
me from abundance, happiness, success, prosperity and love, but my own
wrong thinking. Love is dealt in the world in the spirit of God and,
therefore, recognizing this unity of love, I am a part of it and have
perfect love, success, prosperity, abundance and health.

The ocean is composed of water. If I take a bucket of water from the
ocean, it still is the water of the ocean. I may take this water to an
island in the sea. Though I have separated this water from the main
body of the ocean, it still is the water from the sea. But, as the
water is separated from the main body of the ocean, it loses its power,
its strength and many of its cardinal properties. I am the same as the
sea water when I, by wrong thinking:--whether it be jealousy, envy,
hatred, misunderstanding, worry or fear--separate myself from the
spirit of God. I am as one going upon an island of humanity. I am still
of that same spirit; but it has been separated, so that within me, it
has lost many of its cardinal virtues. These virtues are there, but I
do not recognize them. Separation has lessened my strength, my
vitality, my power, my health, my happiness, my prosperity and my joy.

Just as it is necessary for the bucket of water to remain in the ocean
in order to contain all of its original power and to retain all of its
original strength, to be intact, so is it necessary for man to keep in
the spirit of at-one-ment with the Father, that we may manifest daily
God's principle of Unity with God, man and nature.

When we have maintained that attitude of one-ness with the Father in
all respects, we are then recognizing and expecting, in this act, the
fullness of our spirit. This fullness of our spirit will, therefore,
give us health, prosperity and happiness.

When I have a mind that is filled with negative, discordant or
inharmonious thoughts, I am separating myself from the full expression
of the Divine within me. I am the bucket of water going stale on a
human island; but, when I make my spirit at one with the Father by
harmonious thinking, by love, kindness, good will, fellowship and
co-operation, I am not only maintaining all of my original properties,
but I am in correspondence with the Infinite Spirit so that I can
manifest and express His original spirit in every particular.

Where there is a unity of spirit, there is unity of all the good things
of life. Perhaps I am not drawing from the bank of life's experience
everything that I ought to have--because I have separated myself from
the spiritual board of directors in this bank of life, and am not
getting my dividends on time. My mental attitude is the cause;
therefore, as I enter the Silence this time, I am going to maintain the
faith and the love-spirit of my unity with all things. I maintain,
therefore, my at-one-ment with God, with man and nature. I maintain
that all of the original strength of spirit is mine. I hold that the
manifestations of this original spirit will produce everything in my
life for my ultimate good, because I am at one with the Father. All
things are mine.

The Silence, this day, finds me at one with all. The Silence, this day,
finds me at peace with God, Man and Nature. The Silence, this day,
finds me in at-one-ment with God and all, in unity with every
conceivable thing in the universe. Therefore, my unity, my at-one-ment
with the Father, my wholeness of spirit with God brings into my life
everything for my good.

All things work together for my good in my at-one-ment with Man, God
and Nature--in my unity with all.

       *       *       *       *       *



HOW TO HAVE MORE

"I Am Unselfish in Action, Being and Motive."

The science of psychology as applied to everyday life is, strictly
speaking, a new science. It is a matter of thousands of people in the
world all of a sudden coming in contact with certain laws, which make
them successful, healthy and prosperous.

It is quite natural, because man is interested more in himself than in
any one else, that, when he finds these laws may be applied to give him
more abundance, the tendency may be to use these laws for selfish
purposes.

Nothing could be more unpsychological. The laws should be used for the
individual, but should not stop there. Each individual who is profiting
by the operation of the laws, or understanding of psychology, ought not
only to get everything himself that psychology can give him, but he
should pass these on to others; he should tell others about it; he
should cry it from the housetops and megaphone it from the street
corners. He should not want to get everything himself, but wish the
same that he has to everyone else. By doing this, the law will rebound,
and, instead of having less, he will have still more than he would have
were he thinking about the laws for himself alone.

The human race is made up of a whole lot of selfishness, and the man,
or the woman, who hopes to get the most out of life and out of
psychology, must learn at the very beginning of his or her
understanding of the laws. Then, only, will the best come to those who
are absolutely unselfish.

If there is any selfish motive or selfish desire in your heart, you may
operate the law and get a certain amount of benefit, nay, you may even
become rich by it and have great power, but it should not end there.
Your riches are for the use of others, as well as for yourselves, and
the real psychologist, in getting his riches, will pass on to others
that which he has. The real psychologist, in getting more power, will
share it with others and will use it for the good of others, as well as
for his own personal aggrandizement.

Therefore hold the thought: "I am unselfish in action, being and
motive."

Many a person never will get the demonstrations he wants, because the
channel of abundance and prosperity, happiness and joy, is clogged up
with his own selfish attitude. The selfish person who does operate the
laws, does so by overbalancing his selfishness with some other great
virtue. But when he is extremely selfish, he may never have
demonstrations as he wants; he may not have enough other virtues to
outweigh his selfishness. He may live for years, and know what the laws
are, and yet lack this one little thing, _unselfishness_, in operating
the laws for his own abundance, prosperity or happiness.

If you are not having the demonstrations you want, it is because there
is a kink in the mind somewhere. The kink may be selfishness, or it may
be pride, haughtiness, duplicity, dishonesty, hatred, envy or jealousy.

This time we are going to hold the thought: "I am unselfish in action,
being and motive," and each time we go into the Silence, this unselfish
spirit shall be the guiding-star of our thoughts. It will be the
personal touch with the Infinite Spirit itself.

The beginning of life's happiness, as well as the end thereof, is the
spirit of unselfishness.

"I am unselfish in action, being and motive."

       *       *       *       *       *



ALL THINGS ARE IN DIVINE ORDER

"Divine Harmony and Peace Actuate Every Thought and Action of My
Being."

I realize that all things are in Divine order for me and mine. There
can be no disturbance in the world without or the world within my being
but that is in perfect harmony with the Infinite.

The circumstances outside of my life are all for my good. My
environment where I am now and the conditions in which I am living, I
make harmonize for me by my attitude of mind. I think only peace, I
breathe only love, I speak only harmony. My conditions and my
environment, although outwardly inharmonious to my likes and
tendencies, are changed by the alchemy of my thinking into a perfect
symphony of happiness for me now.

"Divine Harmony and Peace actuate every thought and action of my
being." This thought is energy, this thought is life, this thought is
power. The energy, life and power of this thought weaves all of my
diversified Life's experiences into a Divine pattern of perfection for
me. There can be no trouble, disappointments, sorrow, reverses, loss or
discord but that shall be changed for my good when I think Spirit and
live the affirmation of today, namely, "Divine Harmony and Peace
actuate every thought and action of my being." All things are in Divine
order.

The Spirit of Divinity prompts my thinking. The Divine within me
actuates my actions. The God Powers within, this minute are working all
things together for my good. There can be no danger come nigh my
dwelling for my body is the temple of the living God. Therefore, the
God Spirit within me protects me from all harm, inspires me to high
ideals, lifts me to heights of righteousness and fills my soul with
love. Love for my circumstances, love for my present conditions, love
for my environment, love for every one in the world, love for all of
the creation of God.

Therefore I have no enemies, for I love all. I recognize no
misfortunes, for the love energy within turns all misfortunes and
sorrows into stepping stones for my greater advancement and
achievement. The God energy within transforms all inharmonious
conditions without into a perfect harmony within. The Kingdom of God
now reigns within me and I am at ease, at peace and at-one-ment with
all nature and God. The harmony therefore within me in nature and in
God gives me perfect peace within and perfect peace without. Divine
thought and energy, love and blessing actuate every action of my being.

Where Divine Love reigns there can be no trouble, no discord, no
inharmony, no lack, no limitation, no sorrow, no grief, no sickness, no
failure. The energy of Divine Love transforms all things into my Good.
The Love and Peace of the Father abideth within me and is manifested
without so that my life is one harmonious whole touching the lives of
all others who come in contact with me so that they, too, feel my
vibrations of at-one-ment with the Father and they in turn become
harmonious and complete in Spirit with man and God.

Divine Harmony and Peace actuate every thought and action of my being.
All things are in Divine order.

       *       *       *       *       *



THOUGHT TO HOLD IN SILENCE AND TO MEDITATE UPON DURING THE DAY

FOR JUSTICE

"There's a Spirit of Justice that Secures me in Which is My Own."

If we reach a consciousness of justice, we need have no doubts as to
our care in every particular while journeying between the two peaks of
eternity--from birth to the Great Divide.

There is nothing that can defeat justice; and the person who has a
consciousness of justice will attract to himself every conceivable
thing needed for this life, because it will be the logical objective of
justice to supply to each individual that justice for which he thinks.

That is the reason why this affirmation is so complete in itself;
namely, "There is a spirit of JUSTICE that secures me in which is my
own, and this security is provided already for us by the Spirit of
Justice."

It would be a psychological paradox to think that Justice could be
defeated. That could not be. Perhaps it appears to you that your own
has not yet been secured to you, but, remember that life is
fleeting--that a year is as a tale that is told--and that a decade is
but as "Ships that pass in the night"--when the years have vanished in
the distance.

If you have lived a life of justice, and it appears now that your own
is not coming to you, that someone else is having more of the good
things of life than you, and that someone seems to have used the art of
the man of injustice, be not deceived, God is not mocked, for
"whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap." If you have sowed
equity and justice in the days that are gone, be sure that the same
equity and justice will be secured to you.

The Scriptures tell us not to think too much of the man who is
nourishing like a green bay tree, for his efforts are soon cut off and
he vanisheth away.

One who is astride the scales of justice, and who thinks that he can
hold the balance, is gravely mistaken. He may have occupied his present
position for many years, first putting his weight on one side and then
on the other in an effort to keep his equilibrium. Perhaps today it
appears that the scales of justice are being well manipulated by his
insincerity, duplicity or trickery--but it is like the green bay tree.
It will soon pass away.

Justice is as eternal as God Himself, and there is no more possibility
of defeating it in the individual's life, in your own life, in the life
of a nation or in the history of mankind, than there is likelihood that
the sun can get away from its own rays. The justice of God is eternal,
or, in other words, God always is Justice, personified. Where God
rules, and where His laws and mandates have been given by His own fiat,
"man, neither flesh nor the devil" can defeat the ultimate outcome of
justice. Your own is secured to you.

Man himself is fashioned by the finger of Divinity. The crown of
justice is placed upon his brow and no ruthless hand of greed,
duplicity or evil dexterity can ever tear it away. It is there to stay,
and the man who has been thus crowned because he has lived in this
consciousness of justice--in the consciousness of God Himself--is bound
to have come back to him that which he has thought, that which he has
sowed--Justice. You are secured by this spirit of justice.

Perhaps already your life has had the law of compensation bring to you
more than to others of whom you may think, and who, because of their
bank account, get more out of life than you. A man may have a million
dollars, and yet not be as happy as the laborer living in a thatched
cottage. _Perhaps Justice has tipped the scales in your favor
already--and you have failed to recognize it. Perhaps you have
children, loved ones, family and fireside which bring more comfort to
you than the land owner gets who lives in his palace on the hill_.

Half of Life, or the joys of Life, depend upon our ability to recognize
and appreciate the blessings we already have. Therefore, in counting
your blessings, or discounting your blessings, be sure that you use a
moral standard, instead of a material standard, in gauging whether
justice has been meted out to you or not.

The Justice of the Eternal secures me, the Spirit of Justice secures me
in which is mine own. Believe it, think it, live it, claim it and
Justice shall be yours.

       *       *       *       *       *



Question--In practicing the Silence, the mind seems to flutter all
about and there is great nervous tension. What is wrong?

Answer--Lack of concentration. This person ought to follow some
simple exercise of concentration, such as given below, until the mind
has control over the body. By practicing a few of the simple exercises
given below, fifteen minutes a day, and then taking the Silence a few
hours after these exercises have been practiced, the mind will begin to
be under control.

The nervous tension is caused because of this lack of control, and in
the effort to bring the scattering mind into one focus the reaction
comes upon the nervous system which, in turn, reacts upon the body.

Practice and exercises for lack of concentration follow.




EXERCISES

By Thos. Parker Boyd


     (1) Select some part of the body, a foot or hand, with the
     idea of HEAT. While holding the mind in this attitude,
     breathe deeply and steadily, and, in from one to four
     minutes, you will feel the warm glow coming to the foot. In
     this way, you can soon master the entire body. Begin with the
     sense of feeling. If there is an itching of the body, make it
     stop by the force of your will. In from three days to three
     weeks, you can stop the itching sensation at will. Then try
     the habit of sneezing; stubbornly resist the inclination to
     sneeze, and you will soon have the mastery. Now try your will
     on coughing. When the tickling sensation comes, stop it by
     the exercise of your will. You can soon master it. Next try
     it on pain. When you feel a pain in the body, instead of
     rubbing on liniment, rub in a little will power; soon it will
     ease your pain as if by magic. With the fingers of one hand
     rub the skin on the back of the other hand, stroking toward
     the elbow, and will that all feeling shall disappear. In from
     one to three minutes, take a needle, and you can stick it
     through the skin on the back of the hand without pain. You
     may have to try it a dozen times, but persistence will bring
     success. Having mastered the sense of feeling, take up that
     of hearing.

     (2) It may seem impossible at first thought, but you have
     seen people so absorbed in what they were reading or thinking
     that they heard nothing, although you addressed them
     directly. They are simply abstracted from all else, and are
     thinking of one thing--to the exclusion of everything else.
     They entered this state of abstractedness unconsciously. To
     do so intentionally, you go by the law of indirectness. For
     instance, take sight; concentrate your vision and your whole
     attention upon some object, real or imaginary, until soon the
     sense of HEARING becomes dormant. A little practice will
     enable you to study, think or sleep, regardless of noise.

     (3) Having mastered hearing, begin on SIGHT. You have known
     people who walked on the street, looked at you and passed by
     without recognition, although they knew you well. A person
     deeply thinking on some subject, neither sees nor hears, but
     uses the mental sense entirely. The method is to let the eyes
     be open, but concentrate the thoughts on hearing or feeling.

     (4) After getting control of your sight, take up the TASTE.
     Take some tasteless thing on the tongue, abstract the mind to
     something else until the taste becomes dormant. Then take
     something with more taste to it, abstracting the taste, until
     by this gradual process you can make the sourest pickle
     sweet.

     (5) Finally take some light odor, and hold it before the
     nostrils, abstracting the attention from the sense of smell,
     by hearing or seeing, etc., until by practice you can pass
     through the foulest odor without inconvenience or notice.

Sit or stand absolutely motionless, except your breathing, for one to
five minutes at a time. Do this often.

Practice closing each finger in rotation; then, when all are closed,
open one at a time very slowly, keeping the attention fixed on what you
are doing. Keep all the other fingers still, save the one you are
exercising with.

Inhale gradually for ten seconds, then exhale in the same way and time.

Look steadily at some point or object for a minute without winking the
eye, keeping your attention fixed on the object.

Look at a picture critically, then close your eyes and mentally
reconstruct it.

Close your eyes and construct the face of a friend, feature by feature.

Fix your attention on a hand or foot, hold on it the idea of heat and
continue until the hand or foot feels warm. Then try cold; then try
pain.

Will that the person in front of you shall turn around or put his hand
on his head or neck.

Hold your hand on some one in pain and say, "I will the pain to
depart." Repeat till the pain goes.

        *       *       *       *       *




Note.--For a scientific understanding of positive and negative
concentration, see "Practical Psychology and Sex Life," by the author.




SILENT TREATMENT

Those at a distance or those who cannot attend my classes may have
silent treatments--distance is no barrier--race or creed no bar to
those who earnestly want to benefit from the Silent Treatment.

Many marvelous cures have been reported through Silent Treatment.
Business has been increased, positions secured, bad habits broken,
prosperity demonstrated, peace and harmony restored in home and
business.

This is one of the strongest of Dr. Bush's study features. Use blank on
opposite page for yourself, your friends or those whom you desire to
help. You may begin it at any time.

You will get the vibration of the campaign and the power of thousands
of minds working for you and with you for your health and happiness.

These silent treatments will help the sick rise above disease, overcome
despair, and bring to themselves the positive healing vibration of Dr.
Bush and his class.

USE BLANK ON NEXT PAGE AND BOLD THE THOUGHT OF THE DEMONSTRATION YOU
DESIRE--THERE IS NO FEE. GIVE IN PROPORTION AS YOU HOPE TO SECURE.
"FREELY YE HAVE RECEIVED, FREELY GIVE." THE LAW OF COMPENSATION
DEMONSTRATES THIS TRUTH.





PLEASE USE THIS BLANK

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

In order that we may mentally treat your particular case more
specifically, please answer the following questions and return this
blank:

Date...............................................................

What is the nature of your ailment?................................

...................................................................

How long so affected?..............................................

Ever taken Silent Treatment?.......................................

Ever had a severe accident, shock, great sorrow or disappointment?
Please give particulars.

...................................................................

...................................................................

Are you subject to moods; high tempered; erratic?..................

Are you reading Dr. Bush's books?..................................

Which ones?........................................................

Are you willing to earnestly work in harmony with the treatment when

  sent out?........................................................

Name...............................................................

Address, Street and No.............................................

...................................................................

City.................................State.........................

----------------------------------------------------------------

Enclosed find $..................as my love offering.

Send to DAVID V. BUSH
---- Franklin Avenue
St. Louis, Mo.





Dr. David V. Bush's Famous

SILENCE RECORDS

New--Different--Startling

MADE BY DR. DAVID V. BUSH IN PERSON

This famous "Silence Record" is unlike anything else ever produced.

It brings right to the privacy of your own room the actual words,
affirmations and intonations of Dr. Bush as he leads thousands in the
Silence.

Those who cannot be present at Dr. Bush's famous "Silence Classes" will
find the use of these "Silence Records" interesting, helpful and
stimulating.

They teach you how to enter the "Silence" and how to intone and use it
constructively for your good and that of others.

Can be used on any phonograph that uses a needle. It is the largest
size that can be made.

There is no other record like this made and it can only be bought
direct from "The Universal Fellowship." Order this famous "Silence"
record today and begin at once to get in harmony with Dr. Bush's
healing and inspirational "Silence."

Price, each..........................................$2.00




KINKS IN THE MIND--THE CAUSE AND CURE OF SICKNESS


BY DAVID V. BUSH

What is the kink in your mind? Does your subconscious mind entertain
thoughts of fear, sickness, poverty, unhappiness--do you lack
courage--have you been hampered in reaching your success goal--do you
want to be master of self and your own destiny? Do you wish to conquer
disease--strengthen your personality--be more and do more?

Here then is a way to overcome all these mental handicaps and develop
within yourself constructive action. Dr. Bush, through his vast
experience in handling thousands of cases, has proven beyond a doubt
that all sickness, poverty and unhappiness is caused by "KINKS" in the
mind. When the store house of the intellect, the subconscious mind,
becomes clogged up with morbid thoughts and destructive suggestions the
physical being refuses to work in harmony.

Dr. Bush tells you how to train your subconscious mind along the path
of creative thinking. He points out the means of attaining the very
things in life that your better self has longed for. He explains how
you make your "Dreams of success come true" and he gives you actual
examples.

The secret of success, health and prosperity will no longer remain a
secret for you, if you will read and follow the instructions of this
wonderful teacher.

If you are sick this book tells you why you are sick--it explains the
mental processes that react on your physical nature--it places within
your reach the means of curing yourself and others. After reading it
you will understand better the process of positive thinking--and you
will be able to attune your physical nature so that it will work in
harmony with your mental nature--you will understand how to take the
"KINKS" out of the mind.

A book that may mean the turning point in your life--one that you
should get and read now--without a day's delay.

PRICE, PER COPY.....................................50C




HOW TO DEMONSTRATE PROSPERITY

Most people fail to become prosperous because they lack a definite
working plan. Dr. David V. Bush has prepared a simple chart so that you
may analyze your failings and conquer them. With it you may demonstrate
prosperity--it will point out your weak points and show the way to
actual accomplishment.

Whatever your walk in life--no matter how many failures you have
had--no matter how discouraged and despondent you may feel--you need
this self-analysis chart right now. Send for it today. Just 25c, money
order or stamps.




WHY SOME PEOPLE FAIL IN VISUALIZING


RULES FOR VISUALIZATION

To visualize and concentrate successfully, certain definite principles
underlying the laws that control the functions of the mind must be
understood and applied. My experience in thousands of cases shows that
failure is often due to the wrong application of these laws--to a
misunderstanding of the mental processes necessary to properly focus
the thought waves upon some definite desire and the urge of the
conscious mind for too hasty action.

The laws of visualization and concentration are well defined and when
properly exercised are without limitation as to success, but to
accomplish results one must understand and use these laws properly.

You will more readily grasp the principle that governs the laws of
visualization and concentration after reading this little booklet.

In it Dr. David Bush has gone right down to bed rock--he thoroughly
explains these necessary laws--he puts you right and shows you your
mistakes--he starts you off on the right foot so that you may apply
these laws for your benefit and profit.

Dr. Bush believes, from his own vast experience, that more people fail
on concentration and visualization than on any other operation of the
laws of mind now being studied or applied, because they only partly
understand these laws. In this pamphlet he shows _why_ the vast
majority of people fail in visualizing. There are natural laws which
are very often cross-circuited by well intentioned people trying to
operate them for their good, all because they fail to understand the
right way. You will understand visualization after you read "Why Some
People Fail in Visualization."

Send for this book today--you will understand this subject after
reading it--you need it now---send 25c in stamps or coin.




THE INFLUENCE OF SUGGESTION AND AUTO-SUGGESTION

In this little booklet Dr. David V. Bush discusses Suggestion and
Auto-Suggestion from a different angle than that in "Practical
Psychology and Sex Life" and "Applied Psychology and Scientific
Living." He takes the practical side of Suggestion and points out its
value and usefulness. He explains the limitations of Suggestion and
deals in a different way with the mental laws that control this
powerful factor for your success. No matter what thought you have given
to this interesting subject--no matter how much you studied Suggestion,
you will be surprised and delighted with the plain everyday way in
which Dr. Bush explains this mental phenomena.

This is a different angle of Suggestion than in either "Applied
Psychology and Scientific Living" or "Practical Psychology and Sex
Life." Also a different angle than has been printed in the fifty-cent
series by the same author under "The Subconscious Mind." This pamphlet
not only deals differently with the law of Suggestion as mentioned
above, but it is most entertaining, readable and likeable from the
practical side of suggestion. There will be stimulation, inspiration
and mental cerebration in reading this pamphlet--"The Influence of
Suggestion."

You will welcome this little booklet as a new avenue for increasing
your knowledge of this fascinating study and you will acquire a newer
and different understanding of its usefulness.

By all means secure this little booklet without delay. Your copy is
ready. Just 25 cents, coin or stamps, will start it by first mall.




WHAT TO EAT

Your capacity for constructive thinking is in exact ratio to the kind
of food you put in your stomach. Your physical being and cellular
development is retarded or improved by the food you eat. Sickness is,
in many instances, the result of wrong diet.

What you eat determines your fitness to fight and conquer in life's
battles.

"What to Eat" is a book that you must read. It shows you the value of
eating right--it explains the cause of disease from wrong eating--it
gives you the proper diet and explains why.

To succeed--to have poise and courage--to be immune from sickness--to
be strong and sturdy--to think fast and act quickly--to be married
happily--consider your diet.

When you read this book you will be able to choose a combined diet that
will nourish your body and build mentality.

All life is a battle for place--the fittest only survive--stop putting
poison into your stomach--learn the secret of vigorous health and long
life.

Written by a dietitian of long experience in collaboration with Dr.
Bush himself.

You will want this book now. Only a limited number will be printed.
Heavy cardboard cover--price, only 25 cents per copy.




WILL POWER AND SUCCESS


BY DAVID V. BUSH

You want to know how to get the maximum amount of success--this book
will unlock the hidden treasure.

You do not have to live in lack and limitation when there are natural
laws to give you abundance, success and happiness.

This book makes plain the great laws for success, health and abundance.

You cannot fail to understand or operate those fundamental laws for
your success, as Dr. Bush outlines them here.

You will find it different from any other work ever written on Will
Power. The culmination of over twenty years of research and study, it
deals in simple language with the possibilities of every man--how you
and everyone else may rise from the slough of mediocrity to the
pinnacle of wealth and fame.

It teaches the great laws of success, health and abundance.

It teaches the simple, easy, everyday, workaday rules which will bring
to you abundance--success--happiness--love.

This book has been a guide-post which has steered many a traveler out
of the ruts and mire of dismal struggle on to the smooth, oiled
turnpike of a successful, happy, useful life.

There is nothing mysterious, mystical, or supernatural in the elements
of success and happiness. There is nothing in this book which the
humblest among us cannot understand and yet it appeals to those who are
versed in literature and science as well. In the simple everyday
language of the people it tells in an interesting, fascinating way, the
rules easily applicable to everyday life.




PRICE:

     In Uniform Bed Cloth Binding............................. $2.50

     In Novelette Binding (leather)............................ 3.50




MIND POWER PLUS


DAVID V. BUSH, EDITOR

If you want to keep abreast of the times in all lines of mental
science, new thought, applied psychology and metaphysics, you should
subscribe for Mind Power Plus, the pace-making periodical in the field
of mental science and advanced thought.

In this magazine you will find more special departments, and more
worth-while articles of a practical nature than in any other periodical
of its kind on the market. You will find features in Mind Power Plus
that will not only be of intense interest but also of extremely
practical value.

Mind Power Plus brings to you the latest and the best in all branches
of applied psychology. It will help you to solve your problems. It will
be a constant companion, guide, inspiration and source of comfort
throughout the year. If you have taken any psychology, metaphysical or
mental science courses you will get more out of them by reading Mind
Power Plus. If you have never taken such a course you will easily grasp
every message in Mind Power Plus because all the articles are written
in such a simple, interesting, popular way. You will be introduced to
the most fascinating subject on earth--You. This magazine is dedicated
to the purpose of helping You--to success, health, prosperity aid
happiness. That is its mission.

Mind Power Plus is a big 64-page monthly magazine that will help you
"Know Self".

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

     PER YEAR......................................... $3.00

     PER COPY........................................... .35



FIFTY-CENT SERIES OF BOOKLETS

BY DAVID V. BUSH

     The Universality of The Master Mind.

     Grit and Gumption.

     Kinks in the Mind--The Cause and Cure of Sickness.[4]

     The Law of Vibration and Its Uses. Applied Psychology and What It
       is.[5]

     What is Love--How to Keep It. The Chemistry of Thought.[5]

     The Law of Abundance. How to Double Your Efficiency. How to
       Develop Personality.[5]

     Life's Greatest Bet. The Power of Visualization. How to Make Your
       Dreams Come True.[5]

     Smile, Smile, Smile. Man's Worst Enemy.[5]

     The Functions of the Subconscious Mind. Psychological Law of
       Suggestion and Auto-Suggestion.[5]




SPECIAL OFFER

Order four for $2.00 and you may have any one of the others FREE.




Works of David V. Bush

                                                     Cloth    Novelette

     Practical Psychology and Sex Life               $25.00    $27.00

     Character Analysis--How to Read People at Sight   7.50

     Applied Psychology and Scientific Living          3.50      4.50

     Will Power and Success                            2.50      3.50

     How to Make Love and Marry--Sex Harmony           3.00

     Inspirational Poems                               1.75      2.50

     Soul Poems and Love Lyrics                        1.50      2.25

     Poems of Mastery and Love Verse                   1.50      2.25

     The Universality of the Master Mind, paper, 50c   1.00

     Grit and Gumption, paper, 50c                     1.00      1.25

     The Fundamentals of Applied Psychology.

------------------------------------------------------------------
     Editor Mind Power Plus, per Year, $3.00.
------------------------------------------------------------------

ADDRESS:

     DAVID V. BUSH, PUBLISHER
     ---- FRANKLIN AVE.
     ST. LOUIS, MO.




NOTES

[1:  Taken from Applied Psychology and Scientific Living.]

[2:  For complete study of how to charge the subconscious mind,
     see chapters on the "Subconscious Mind," "How to Cleanse the
     Aura," "How to Get What You Want," "Concentration" and
     "Visualization," in "Practical Psychology and Sex Life" by
     the author.]

[3:  Scientific explanation of the Silence and How to enter the
     Silence and the benefits derived thereby, will be found in
     "Practical Psychology and Sex Life" by David V. Bush.]

[4:  This is from The Fundamentals of Applied Psychology.]

[5:  This is from Applied Psychology and Scientific Living.]




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SILENCE: WHAT IT IS AND HOW TO USE IT ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

