


CLAIRVOYANCE AND OCCULT POWERS

INCLUDING
CLAIRVOYANCE, CLAIRAUDIENCE
PREMONITION AND IMPRESSIONS
CLAIRVOYANT PSYCHOMETRY
CLAIRVOYANT CRYSTAL-GAZING
DISTANT CLAIRVOYANCE
PAST CLAIRVOYANCE
FUTURE CLAIRVOYANCE
SECOND-SIGHT
PREVISION
CLAIRVOYANT DEVELOPMENT
ASTRAL-BODY TRAVELING
ASTRAL-PLANE PHENOMENA
PSYCHIC INFLUENCE--Personal
 and Distant
PSYCHIC ATTRACTION
PSYCHIC HEALING
TELEPATHY
MIND-READING
THOUGHT TRANSFERENCE and
 other PSYCHIC PHENOMENA

By

Swami Panchadasi

Author of "The Human Aura," "The Astral World," Etc.

1916







SYNOPSIS OF THE LESSONS


LESSON I
THE ASTRAL SENSES
The skeptical person who "believes only the evidence of his senses." The
man who has much to say about "horse sense." "Common Sense" versus
Uncommon Senses. The ordinary five senses are not the only senses. The
ordinary senses are not as infallible as many think them. Illusions of the
five physical senses. What is back of the organs of physical sense. All
senses an evolution of the sense of feeling. How the mind receives the
report of the senses. The Real Knower behind the senses. What the
unfolding of new senses means to man. The super-physical senses. The
Astral Senses. Man has seven physical senses, instead of merely five. Each
physical sense has its astral sense counterpart. What the astral senses
are. Sensing on the astral plane. How the mind functions on the astral
plane, by means of the astral senses. The unfolding of the Astral Senses
opens up a new world of experience to man.


LESSON II
TELEPATHY vs. CLAIRVOYANCE
The two extra physical senses of man. The extra sense of "the presence of
other living things." The "telepathic sense." How man may sense the
presence of other living things apart from the operation of his ordinary
five physical senses. This power is strongly developed in savages and
barbarians, but has become atrophied in most civilized men, by continued
disuse. It is now vestigal in civilized man, but may be developed by
practice. Animals have this extra sense highly developed, and it plays a
very important part in their protection from enemies; their capture of
prey, etc. The strange actions of dogs, horses, etc., explained. How the
geese saved Rome by reason of this sense. All hunters have experienced
evidences of the existence of this sense on the part of animals. The
physical telepathic sense. How it operates. Interesting instances of its
possession by animals, and savage tribes. Women possess it strongly. The
distinction between this form of thought-transference and clairvoyance.


LESSON III
TELEPATHY EXPLAINED
What "telepathy" means. The mental process by which one "knows at a
distance." The sending and receiving of waves and currents of thought and
feeling. Thought vibrations, and how they are caused. The part played by
the cerebrum, cerebellum, and medulla oblongata--the three brains of man.
The part played by the solar plexus and other great nervous centres. How
thought messages are received. How states of emotional excitement are
transmitted to others. The Pineal Gland: what it is, and what it does. The
important part it plays in telepathy and thought-transference. Mental
atmospheres. Psychic atmospheres of audiences, towns, houses, stores, etc.
Why you are not affected by all thought vibrations in equal measure and
strength. How thought vibrations are neutralized. Affinities and
repulsions between different thought vibrations. Interesting facts
concerning telepathy. Scientific explanations of telepathy.


LESSON IV
SCIENTIFIC TELEPATHY
The important investigations of the Society for Psychical Research. True
telepathy and pseudo-telepathy; how they are distinguished by scientists.
Strict tests imposed in investigations. The celebrated "Creery
Experiments," and how they were conducted. The elaboration of the
"guessing" game. Seventeen cards chosen right, in straight succession.
Precautions against fraud or collusion. Two hundred and ten successes out
of a possible three hundred and eighty-two. Science pronounces the results
as entirely beyond the law of coincidences and mathematical probability;
and that the phenomena were genuine and real telepathy. Still more
wonderful tests. Telepathy an incontestable reality. "A psychic force
transmitting ideas and thoughts." Interesting cases of spontaneous
telepathy, scientifically proven. Extracts from the scientific records.
Cold scientific reports read like a romance, and prove beyond doubt the
reality of this great field of phenomena.


LESSON V
MIND-READING, AND BEYOND
What "Mind-Reading" is. The two phases of Mind-Reading. Mind-Reading with
physical contact; and without physical contact. Why the scientific
investigators make the distinction. Why science has been over-cautious;
and how it falls short of the full understanding of contact Mind-Reading.
How the thought-waves flow along the nerves of the projector and
recipient. Like telegraphy over wires, as compared with the wireless
method. How to learn by actual experience, and not alone by reading books.
How to experiment for yourself; and how to obtain the best results in
Mind-Reading. The working principles of Mind-Reading stated. Full
directions and instruction given for the successful performance of the
interesting feats. This lesson is really a little manual of
practical instruction in Mind-Reading, and the higher phases of
Thought-Transference. The person carefully studying and applying the
principles taught therein should become very proficient in both private
and public manifestations.


LESSON VI
CLAIRVOYANT PSYCHOMETRY
What Clairvoyance really is; and what it is not. The faculty of acquiring
super-normal knowledge of facts and happening at a distance, or in past or
future time, independent of the ordinary senses, and independent of
telepathic reading of the minds of others. The different kinds of
Clairvoyance described. What is Psychometry? Clairvoyant en rapport
relations on the astral plane, with distant, past or future happenings and
events; by means of a connecting material link. How to obtain the psychic
affinity or astral relation to other things by means of a bit of stone,
lock of hair, article of wearing apparel, etc. Interesting instances of
clairvoyant psychometry. How to go about the work of psychometrizing. How
to develop the power. How to secure the best conditions; and what to do
when you have obtained them. Psychometry develops the occultist for still
higher clairvoyant powers.


LESSON VII
CLAIRVOYANT CRYSTAL-GAZING
The second great method of securing clairvoyant en rapport relations with
the astral plane. How the crystal, magic-mirror, etc., serves to focus the
psychic energy of the clairvoyant person. The crystal serves the purpose
of a psychic microscope or telescope. How crystals tend to become
polarized to the vibrations of their owner. Why crystals should be
preserved for the personal use of their owners. The use of crystals, or
other forms of shining objects, by different peoples in ancient and modern
times. How they are employed in Australia, New Zealand, Fiji Islands,
South America, etc., by the primitive tribes. Various substitutes for the
crystal. Full directions for Crystal Gazing. Complete instructions and
warnings. All stages described, from the first "milky mist" to the clearly
defined "psychic photograph." The Astral Tube, and the part it plays in
Crystal Gazing. A complete little text-book of the subject.


LESSON VIII
CLAIRVOYANT REVERIE
The higher forms of Clairvoyance, and how they may be cultivated and
acquired. Trance conditions not essential to highest Clairvoyance,
although often connected therewith. In Clairvoyant Reverie, the
clairvoyant does not become unconscious; but merely "shuts out" the
outside world of sights and sounds. Shifting the consciousness from the
physical plane to the astral. Clairvoyant Reverie may be safely and
effectively induced by mental concentration alone. Artificial methods
dangerous, and not advised by best authorities. Abnormal conditions not
desirable. The "one pointed" mind. The Clairvoyant "day dream" or "brown
study." False "psychic development." Use of hypnotic drugs strongly
condemned. Scientific psychological methods stated and taught. The laws of
attention and concentration of the mind. How Clairvoyance develops by this
method. The true occult instruction given fully.


LESSON IX
SIMPLE CLAIRVOYANCE
What the Clairvoyant senses in Simple Clairvoyance. Perception of the
Aura, and Auric Emanations of others; Psychic Vibrations; Astral Colors;
Thought Currents, Waves and Vibrations, etc., are features of Simple
Clairvoyance. The beautiful kaleidoscopic spectacle of the Auric changes.
The Prana Aura, and its appearances. The Mental and Emotional Aura, and
its many interesting phases. Perception of Astral Thought-Forms. Other
Astral Phenomena. The Astral World, and its Myriad Manifestations. Strange
aspects of Astral Visioning. "Seeing through a Brick-wall." The X-Ray
Vision. Reading from closed books, sealed envelopes, etc., and how it is
explainable. Seeing into the depths of the earth, and the occult
explanation thereof. The Laws and Principles of this Extraordinary Power.
Magnifying and Diminishing Clairvoyant Vision. A wonderful field for
experiment opened out for the student.


LESSON X
CLAIRVOYANCE OF DISTANT SCENES
The characteristics of Space Clairvoyance. The Astral Seeing of Distant
Scenes; and through intervening objects. Remarkable instances of this
power, well authenticated and established. Interesting and instructive
historical cases recorded and explained. Testimony of the Society for
Psychical Research concerning this phase of Clairvoyance. The interesting
case of W.T. Stead, the celebrated English writer, who went down on the
"Titanic." The important testimony of Swedenborg, the eminent religious
teacher. Other well-authenticated cases happening to well-known persons.
The evidence collected by the Society for Psychical Research. Interesting
German case. Why so many cases of this kind happen when the person is on
his death-bed, or seriously ill. Why such experiences often occur in
dreams. Actual "appearance" of persons at a distance, and how explained.
Important and interesting facts recited in connection with this phase of
Clairvoyance.


LESSON XI
CLAIRVOYANCE OF THE PAST
The clairvoyant perception of the facts, events and happenings of past
time. There is no difference in the nature of this strange phenomenon,
whether the past time be but five minutes or else five thousand years. How
is it possible to "see" a thing that no longer exists? The "just how" of
this strange happening. Nothing could be perceived if it had actually
disappeared from existence. But nothing entirely disappears in fact. On
the astral plane are recorded all things, events and happenings since the
beginning of the present world-cycle. The "Akashic Records;" or the
"Astral Light;" constitute the great record books of the past. The
clairvoyant gaining access to these may read the past like a book.
Analogies in physical science. Interesting scientific facts. What
astronomy teaches on the subject. How the records of the past are stored.
How they are read by the clairvoyant. A fascinating subject clearly
presented and explained.


LESSON XII
CLAIRVOYANCE OF THE FUTURE
The clairvoyant power manifest in all forms of perception of facts,
happenings and events of future time. Explanation of Prophecy, Prevision,
Foretelling, Second-Sight, etc. These powers not supernatural; but are
merely the development of the clairvoyant faculties. How may a thing be
"seen" years before it really exists. Nothing could be seen, unless it
existed in some form, at least potential and latent. Keen perception of
the subconscious faculties. Subconscious reasoning from cause to effect.
Coming events cast their shadows before. Fate vs. Free-Will. "Time is but
a relative mode of regarding things." "Events may, in some sense, exist
always, both past and future." Time like a moving-picture reel, containing
the future scene at the present moment, though out of sight. Analogy of
dream-time. An Absolute Consciousness in which past, present and future
exist as a single perception. A glimpse of a transcendental truth. How to
acquire the faculty of Future-Clairvoyance.


LESSON XIII
SECOND-SIGHT, PREVISION, ETC.
Many persons, in all times, in all lands, have possessed the gift of
looking into the future. Not a superstition, but a scientific fact. The
Investigations of the scientific bodies. The Society for Psychical
Research, and its reports on this phase of Clairvoyance. Interesting case
told by a leading Theosophist. Tragedy and Funeral foreseen by Clairvoyant
Prevision, or Second-Sight. Historical instances. George Fox, the Quaker,
and his Second-Sight. The prophecy of the Death of Caesar. Biblical
instances. The celebrated case of Cazotte, which has become a matter of
history. How Cazotte foretold the coming of the French Revolution,
including the fate of eminent personages present at the time of the
prophecy. A startling occurrence, well worthy of careful study. The
historical case of the assassination of Spencer Perceval, Chancellor of
the Exchequer. Other well-authenticated cases. Symbolic visions. Irish and
Scotch cases.


LESSON XIV
ASTRAL-BODY TRAVELING
Astral visioning in Clairvoyance, and visioning by means of the Astral
Body. The difference between the two phases of clairvoyant phenomena. The
characteristics of Astral-Body traveling. How one traveling in the Astral
Body may "see all around him," instead of merely gazing at an astral
picture. Limitations of Astral-Body visioning. What the Astral-Body really
is; and what it is like. How it disengages itself from the physical body,
and travels in space. Many persons "travel in the astral" during ordinary
sleep. Occult teachings regarding Astral-Body traveling. How dying persons
often travel in the astral-body, before death. Many interesting cases
cited, all well-authenticated by scientific investigation. Society for
Psychical Research's records and reports on such cases. Dangers of
uninstructed persons going out on the astral, except in dream state.
"Fools rush in where angels fear to tread." A timely warning. A most
important and interesting subject.


LESSON XV
STRANGE ASTRAL PHENOMENA
Additional phases of Astral Phenomena. Projection of Thought-Forms.
Something between ordinary Clairvoyance and Astral-Body perception. What a
Thought-Form is. How it is created. What it does. Where it goes. How a
portion of one's consciousness is projected in a Thought-Form. Using a
Thought-Form as at cut-post, or observation point. How things appear when
viewed from a Thought-Form. A wonderful phase of occult phenomena.
Advantages and disadvantages of this form of clairvoyant visioning. Hindu
Psychic Magic, and how it is performed. Remarkable illusory effects
produced by Hindu Magicians. All is explained when the principle of the
creation and projection of Thought-Forms is understood. Why the Hindus
excel in this phase of occultism. An interesting description of Hindu
Magic feats. The power of concentrated "visualization." The phenomena of
Levitation, or the moving of articles at a distance. The occult
explanation of this phenomenon. Natural explanation for so-called
"super-natural" occurrence.


LESSON XVI
PSYCHIC INFLUENCE: ITS LAWS AND PRINCIPLES
The laws and principles underlying the power of one mind to influence and
affect another mind. More than ordinary telepathy. The inductive power of
mental vibrations. Everything is in vibration. Mental vibrations are much
higher in the scale than are physical vibrations. What "induction" is. How
a mental state, or an emotional feeling, tends to induce a similar state
in another mind. Many instances cited. The different degrees of vibratory
influence, and what causes the difference. The contagious effect of a
"strong feeling." Why a strong desire hag a dynamic effect in certain
cases. The power of visualization in Psychic Influence. The Attractive
Power of Thought. The effect of Mental Concentration. Focusing your
Forces. Holding the mind to a state of "one-pointedness." Why the
occultist controls his imagination. Suggestions as to practice, and rules
of development. A few easily-mastered principles which give you the key to
the whole of this wonderful subject.


LESSON XVII
PERSONAL PSYCHIC INFLUENCE OVER OTHERS
Psychic Influence exerted over others, when in their presence. Different
degrees of the influence. Possession of this power by Alexander the Great,
Napoleon Bonaparte, Julius Caesar, and other great leaders of men. The
ability to influence others is a sure sign of the possession of this
psychic power. The Three Underlying Principles of Psychic Influence. The
importance of strong desire to influence and exert power. The importance
of clear, positive mental pictures of what effect you wish to produce. The
importance of the firm concentration of your mind on the subject. The
creation of a positive psychic atmosphere. The Positive Psychic Aura. How
to project your Psychic Power. The Psychic Struggle between two persons.
How to handle yourself in such conflicts of Psychic Power. How to
Neutralize the Psychic Power of others, and thus disarm them. The Occult
Shield of Defence. Valuable directions regarding practice and development
of Psychic Power. Scientific Exercises for Development. Important Rules of
Practice.


LESSON XVIII
PSYCHIC INFLUENCE AT A DISTANCE
Psychic Influence over others, manifested when they are distant from the
person exerting the influence. Distance no obstacle. Psychic Induction at
Long-Range. How to create the en rapport condition with the other person.
How to protect yourself against such influence at a distance. The Psychic
Armor. Psychometric Method of producing Distant En Rapport Condition. To
proceed when the en rapport condition is secured. The scientific
explanation of the old tales about sorcery, witchcraft, super-natural
influence, etc. The effect of fear, and belief, on the mind of the other
person. The effect of Denial. The secret of many strange cases made plain.
Some typical cases. The Master-Key which unlocks the doors of many
Mysteries. Low forms of Occultism, and how they may be defeated. Dangerous
Teachings in some quarters. Warnings against their use. The Astral Tube;
how it is erected, used and employed. A simple, plain explanation of a
puzzling occult manifestation. Self-Protection.


LESSON XIX
LAWS OF PSYCHIC ATTRACTION
How psychic vibrations tend to attract to their creator other persons
vibrating along the same lines; and things having a relation to the things
thought of. Harmony and Inharmony in the Psychic World. The Law of Psychic
Attraction. The Law of Psychic Repulsion. An important phase of Astral
Phenomena. The Law works two ways. It draws other persons and things to
you; and you to other persons and things. How the men of "big business"
operate under this Law of Attraction. How scheming exploiters of the
public actually "treat the public" by psychic means. The various forms of
psychic influence employed by persons of this kind. The Law of Attraction,
and how it works out in Business Life. The scientific facts behind the
outward appearance of things. Instances and examples of the working out of
these laws and principles. The Law of Psychic Attraction is as constant
and invariable as the great Law of Gravitation, or Magnetic Attraction.
The Co-Relation of Thoughts and Things. How we may create our own
environment by Psychic Influence.


LESSON XX
PSYCHIC AND MAGNETIC HEALING
The Psychic Principles underlying the many forms of psychic or mental
healing. Many theories--one set of principles. Psychic Healing as old as
the race. The Basic Principles of Psychic Healing. The Physiological
Principles involved. How the Astral Body is used in Psychic Healing. Human
Magnetism, and what it really is. All about Prana. The Laying-on of Hands
in Healing; and what is back of it. What happens in Magnetic Healing. The
Secret of Absent Healing. Space no barrier in Psychic Healing. The Human
Aura and Psychic Healing. The Secret of Suggestive Therapeutics. The
effect of the "affirmations" of the healers. How the Healing Cults obtain
good results. Self-Healing by Psychic Power. Absent Healing by Psychic
Power. How to "treat" others by Absent Treatment. Valuable Instructions
and Practical Methods of Psychic Healing. The whole subject condensed, and
made plain, so that it may be applied by any person of average
intelligence. No fanciful theories; only plain, practical facts for actual
application.




INTRODUCTION.


In preparing this series of lessons for students of Western lands, I have
been compelled to proceed along lines exactly opposite to those which I
would have chosen had these lessons been for students in India. This
because of the diametrically opposite mental attitudes of the students of
these two several lands.

The student in India expects the teacher to state positively the
principles involved, and the methods whereby these principles may be
manifested, together with frequent illustrations (generally in the nature
of fables or parables), serving to link the new knowledge to some already
known thing. The Hindu student never expects or demands anything in the
nature of "proof" of the teachers statements of principle or method; in
fact, he would regard it as an insult to the teacher to ask for the same.
Consequently, he does not look for, or ask, specific instances or
illustrations in the nature of scientific evidence or proof of the
principles taught. He may ask for more information, but solely for the
purpose of bringing out some point which he has not grasped; but he avoids
as a pestilence any question seeming to indicate argument, doubt of what
is being taught him, or of the nature of a demand for proof or evidence.

The Western student, on the other hand, is accustomed to maintaining the
skeptical attitude of mind--the scientific attitude of doubt and demand
for proof--and the teacher so understands it. Both are accustomed to
illustrations bringing out the principles involved, but these
illustrations must not be fanciful or figurative--they must be actual
cases, well authenticated and vouched for as evidence. In short, the
Western teacher is expected to actually "prove" to his students his
principles and methods, before he may expect them to be accepted. This, of
course, not from any real doubt or suspicion of the veracity or ability of
the teacher, but merely because the Western mind expects to question, and
be questioned, in this way in the process of teaching and learning.

Consequently, in this series of lessons, I have sought to follow the
Western method rather than the Hindu. So far as is possible, I have
avoided the flat positive statement of principles and methods, and have
sought to prove each step of the teaching. Of course, I have been
compelled to assume the existence of certain fundamental principles, in
order to avoid long and technical metaphysical and philosophical
discussions. I have also had to content myself with the positive flat
assertion of the existence of the Astral Plane, Akashic Records, Prana,
etc., which are fundamental postulates of Hindu philosophy and occult
science--for these are established solely by the experience of those who
are able to function on the higher planes themselves. But, beyond this I
have sought to prove by direct and positive evidence (adapted to the
Western mind) every step of my teaching and methods.

In offering this scientific proof, I have purposely omitted (except in a
few instances) all mention of occult or psychic phenomena occurring in
India, and have confined myself to instances occurring in Western lands to
Western persons. Moreover, I have avoided quoting and citing Hindu
authorities, and have, instead, quoted and cited from authorities well
known and respected in Western lands, such as the Society for Psychical
Research, and the prominent scientists interested in the work of the said
society. In this way I have sought to furnish the Western student with
examples, cases, and illustrations familiar to him, and easily referred
to. Had I cited Indian cases, I might be accused of offering proof that
could not be easily verified; and quoting persons unknown to my readers.
There is a wealth of such cases and illustration in India, naturally, but
these as a rule are traditional and not available in printed form; and
these would not likely be very satisfactory to the Western student.

I must, however, positively and firmly state that while these cases and
illustrations, these quotations and citations, are purely Western, the
principles they illustrate and prove are among the oldest known to Hindu
occult science and philosophy. In fact, having been accepted as proved
truth in India, for centuries past, there is very little demand for
further proof thereof on the part of the Hindus. In the Western world,
however, these things are comparatively new, and must be proved and
attested accordingly. So, as I have said, I have cut the cloth of my
instruction to conform with the pattern favored for the Western garment of
knowledge. So far as the illustrations and cases, the quotations and
citations are concerned--these are purely Western and familiar to the
student. But, when it comes to the principles themselves, this is another
matter--I must be pardoned for stating that these are the outgrowth of
Hindu thought and investigation, and that he who would discover their
roots must dig around the tree of the Wisdom of the East, which has stood
the storms and winds of thousands of years. But the branches of this
mighty tree are wide-spreading, and there is room for many Western
students to rest in its shade and shelter.

In these lessons I have referred occasionally to my two little books,
entitled "The Astral World," and "The Human Aura," respectively. To those
who are interested in these subjects, I recommend these little books; they
are sold at a nominal price, and contain much that will be helpful to the
student of Hindu Occult Science. They are not required, however, to
complete the understanding of the subjects treated upon in these lessons,
and are mentioned and recommended merely as supplementary reading for the
student who wishes to take little "side excursions" away from the main
trip covered in these lessons.

I trust that my students will find the pleasure and satisfaction in
studying these lessons that I have in writing them.

SWAMI PANCHADASI.





LESSON I.

THE ASTRAL SENSES.


The student of occultism usually is quite familiar with the crass
individual who assumes the cheap skeptical attitude toward occult matters,
which attitude he expresses in his would-be "smart" remark that he
"believes only in what his senses perceive." He seems to think that his
cheap wit has finally disposed of the matter, the implication being that
the occultist is a credulous, "easy" person who believes in the existence
of things contrary to the evidence of the senses.

While the opinion or views of persons of this class are, of course,
beneath the serious concern of any true student of occultism, nevertheless
the mental attitude of such persons are worthy of our passing
consideration, inasmuch as it serves to give us an object lesson regarding
the childlike attitude of the average so-called "practical" persons
regarding the matter of the evidence of the senses.

These so-called practical persons have much to say regarding their senses.
They are fond of speaking of "the evidence of my senses." They also have
much to say about the possession of "good sense" on their part; of having
"sound common sense"; and often they make the strange boast that they have
"horse sense," seeming to consider this a great possession. Alas, for the
pretensions of this class of persons. They are usually found quite
credulous regarding matters beyond their everyday field of work and
thought, and accept without question the most ridiculous teachings and
dogmas reaching them from the voice of some claimed authority, while they
sneer at some advanced teaching which their minds are incapable of
comprehending. Anything which seems unusual to them is deemed "flighty,"
and lacking in appeal to their much prized "horse sense."

But, it is not my intention to spend time in discussing these
insignificant half-penny intellects. I have merely alluded to them in
order to bring to your mind the fact that to many persons the idea of
"sense" and that of "senses" is very closely allied. They consider all
knowledge and wisdom as "sense;" and all such sense as being derived
directly from their ordinary five senses. They ignore almost completely
the intuitional phases of the mind, and are unaware of many of the higher
processes of reasoning.

Such persons accept as undoubted anything that their senses report to
them. They consider it heresy to question a report of the senses. One of
their favorite remarks is that "it almost makes me doubt my senses." They
fail to perceive that their senses, at the best, are very imperfect
instruments, and that the mind is constantly employed in correcting the
mistaken report of the ordinary five senses.

Not to speak of the common phenomenon of color-blindness, in which one
color seems to be another, our senses are far from being exact. We may,
by suggestion, be made to imagine that we smell or taste certain things
which do not exist, and hypnotic subjects may be caused to see things that
have no existence save in the imagination of the person. The familiar
experiment of the person crossing his first two fingers, and placing them
on a small object, such as a pea or the top of a lead-pencil, shows us how
"mixed" the sense of feeling becomes at times. The many familiar instances
of optical delusions show us that even our sharp eyes may deceive
us--every conjuror knows how easy it is to deceive the eye by suggestion
and false movements.

Perhaps the most familiar example of mistaken sense-reports is that of the
movement of the earth. The senses of every person report to him that the
earth is a fixed, immovable body, and that the sun, moon, planets, and
stars move around the earth every twenty-four hours. It is only when one
accepts the reports of the reasoning faculties, that he knows that the
earth not only whirls around on its axis every twenty-four hours, but that
it circles around the sun every three hundred and sixty-five days; and
that even the sun itself, carrying with it the earth and the other
planets, really moves along in space, moving toward or around some unknown
point far distant from it. If there is any one particular report of the
senses which would seem to be beyond doubt or question, it certainly would
be this elementary sense report of the fixedness of the earth beneath our
feet, and the movements of the heavenly bodies around it--and yet we know
that this is merely an illusion, and that the facts of the case are
totally different. Again, how few persons really realize that the eye
perceives things up-side-down, and that the mind only gradually acquires
the trick of adjusting the impression?

I am not trying to make any of you doubt the report of his or her five
senses. That would be most foolish, for all of us must needs depend upon
these five senses in our everyday affairs, and would soon come to grief
were we to neglect their reports. Instead, I am trying to acquaint you
with the real nature of these five senses, that you may realize what they
are not, as well as what they are; and also that you may realize that
there is no absurdity in believing that there are more channels of
information open to the ego, or soul of the person, than these much used
five senses. When you once get a correct scientific conception of the real
nature of the five ordinary senses, you will be able to intelligently
grasp the nature of the higher psychic faculties or senses, and thus be
better fitted to use them. So, let us take a few moments time in order to
get this fundamental knowledge well fixed in our minds.

What are the five senses, anyway. Your first answer will be: "Feeling,
seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling." But that is merely a recital of the
different forms of sensing. What is a "sense," when you get right down to
it? Well, you will find that the dictionary tells us that a sense is a
"faculty, possessed by animals, of perceiving external objects by means of
impressions made upon certain organs of the body." Getting right down to
the roots of the matter, we find that the five senses of man are the
channels through which he becomes aware or conscious of information
concerning objects outside of himself. But, these senses are not the
sense-organs alone. Back of the organs there is a peculiar arrangement of
the nervous system, or brain centres, which take up the messages received
through the organs; and back of this, again, is the ego, or soul, or mind,
which, at the last, is the real KNOWER. The eye is merely a camera; the
ear, merely a receiver of sound-waves; the nose, merely an arrangement of
sensitive mucous membrane; the mouth and tongue, simply a container of
taste-buds; the nervous system, merely a sensitive apparatus designed to
transmit messages to the brain and other centres--all being but part of
the physical machinery, and liable to impairment or destruction. Back of
all this apparatus is the real Knower who makes use of it.

Science tells us that of all the five senses, that of Touch or Feeling was
the original--the fundamental sense. All the rest are held to be but
modifications of, and specialized forms of, this original sense of
feeling. I am telling you this not merely in the way of interesting and
instructive scientific information, but also because an understanding of
this fact will enable you to more clearly comprehend that which I shall
have to say to you about the higher faculties or senses.

Many of the very lowly and simple forms of animal life have this one sense
only, and that but poorly developed. The elementary life form "feels" the
touch of its food, or of other objects which may touch it. The plants also
have something akin to this sense, which in some cases, like that of the
Sensitive Plant, for instance, is quite well developed. Long before the
sense of sight, or the sensitiveness to light appeared in animal-life, we
find evidences of taste, and something like rudimentary hearing or
sensitiveness to sounds. Smell gradually developed from the sense of
taste, with which even now it is closely connected. In some forms of lower
animal life the sense of smell is much more highly developed than in
mankind. Hearing evolved in due time from the rudimentary feeling of
vibrations. Sight, the highest of the senses, came last, and was an
evolution of the elementary sensitiveness to light.

But, you see, all these senses are but modifications of the original sense
of feeling or touch. The eye records the touch or feeling of the
light-waves which strike upon it. The ear records the touch or feeling of
the sound-waves or vibrations of the air, which reach it. The tongue and
other seats of taste record the chemical touch of the particles of food,
or other substances, coming in contact with the taste-buds. The nose
records the chemical touch of the gases or fine particles of material
which touch its mucous membrane. The sensory-nerves record the presence of
outer objects coming in contact with the nerve ends in various parts of
the skin of the body. You see that all of these senses merely record the
contact or "touch" of outside objects.

But the sense organs, themselves, do not do the knowing of the presence of
the objects. They are but pieces of delicate apparatus serving to record
or to receive primary impressions from outside. Wonderful as they are,
they have their counterparts in the works of man, as for instance: the
camera, or artificial eye; the phonograph, or, artificial ear; the
delicate chemical apparatus, or artificial taster and smeller; the
telegraph, or artificial nerves. Not only this, but there are always to be
found nerve telegraph wires conveying the messages of the eye, the ear,
the nose, the tongue, to the brain--telling the something in the brain of
what has been felt at the other end of the line. Sever the nerves leading
to the eye, and though the eye will continue to register perfectly, still
no message will reach the brain. And render the brain unconscious, and no
message will reach it from the nerves connecting with eye, ear, nose,
tongue, or surface of the body. There is much more to the receiving of
sense messages than you would think at first, you see.

Now all this means that the ego, or soul, or mind, if you prefer the
term--is the real Knower who becomes aware of the outside world by means
of the messages of the senses. Cut off from these messages the mind would
be almost a blank, so far as outside objects are concerned. Every one of
the senses so cut off would mean a diminishing or cutting-off of a part of
the world of the ego. And, likewise, each new sense added to the list
tends to widen and increase the world of the ego. We do not realize this,
as a rule. Instead, we are in the habit of thinking that the world
consists of just so many things and facts, and that we know every possible
one of them. This is the reasoning of a child. Think how very much smaller
than the world of the average person is the world of the person born
blind, or the person born deaf! Likewise, think how very much greater and
wider, and more wonderful this world of ours would seem were each of us to
find ourselves suddenly endowed with a new sense! How much more we would
perceive. How much more we would feel. How much more we would know. How
much more we would have to talk about. Why, we are really in about the
same position as the poor girl, born blind, who said that she thought that
the color of scarlet must be something like the sound of a trumpet. Poor
thing, she could form no conception of color, never having seen a ray of
light--she could think and speak only in the terms of touch, sound, taste
and smell. Had she also been deaf, she would have been robbed of a still
greater share of her world. Think over these things a little.

Suppose, on the contrary, that we had a new sense which would enable us to
sense the waves of electricity. In that case we would be able to "feel"
what was going on at another place--perhaps on the other side of the
world, or maybe, on one of the other planets. Or, suppose that we had an X
Ray sense--we could then see through a stone wall, inside the rooms of a
house. If our vision were improved by the addition of a telescopic
adjustment, we could see what is going on in Mars, and could send and
receive communications with those living there. Or, if with a microscopic
adjustment, we could see all the secrets of a drop of water--maybe it is
well that we cannot do this. On the other hand, if we had a well-developed
telepathic sense, we would be aware of the thought-waves of others to such
an extent that there would be no secrets left hidden to anyone--wouldn't
that alter life and human intercourse a great deal? These things would
really be no more wonderful than is the evolution of the senses we have.
We can do some of these things by apparatus designed by the brain of
man--and man really is but an imitator and adaptor of Nature. Perhaps, on
some other world or planet there may be beings having seven, nine or
fifteen senses, instead of the poor little five known to us. Who knows!

But it is not necessary to exercise the imagination in the direction of
picturing beings on other planets endowed with more senses than have the
people of earth. While, as the occult teachings positively state, there
are beings on other planets whose senses are as much higher than the
earth-man's as the latter's are higher than those of the oyster, still we
do not have to go so far to find instances of the possession of much
higher and more active faculties than those employed by the ordinary man.
We have but to consider the higher psychical faculties of man, right here
and now, in order to see what new worlds are open to him. When you reach
a scientific understanding of these things, you will see that there really
is nothing at all supernatural about much of the great body of wonderful
experiences of men in all times which the "horse sense" man sneeringly
dismisses as "queer" and "contrary to sense." You will see that these
experiences are quite as natural as are those in which the ordinary five
senses are employed--though they are super-physical. There is the greatest
difference between supernatural and super-physical, you must realize.

All occultists know that man has other senses than the ordinary five,
although but few men have developed them sufficiently well to use them
effectively. These super-physical senses are known to the occultists as
"the astral senses." The term "Astral," used so frequently by all
occultists, ancient and modern, is derived from the Greek word "astra,"
meaning "star." It is used to indicate those planes of being immediately
above the physical plane. The astral senses are really the counterparts of
the physical senses of man, and are connected with the astral body of the
person just as the physical senses are connected with the physical body.
The office of these astral senses is to enable the person to receive
impressions on the astral plane, just as his physical senses enable him to
receive impressions on the physical plane. On the physical plane the mind
of man receives only the sense impressions of the physical organs of
sense; but when the mind functions and vibrates on the astral plane, it
requires astral senses in order to receive the impressions of that plane,
and these, as we shall see, are present.

Each one of the physical senses of man has its astral counterpart. Thus
man has, in latency, the power of seeing, feeling, tasting, smelling, and
hearing, on the astral plane, by means of his five astral senses. More
than this, the best occultists know that man really has seven physical
senses instead of but five, though these two additional senses are not
unfolded in the case of the average person (though occultists who have
reached a certain stage are able to use them effectively). Even these two
extra physical senses have their counterparts on the astral plane.

Persons who have developed the use of their astral senses are able to
receive the sense impressions of the astral plane just as clearly as they
receive those of the physical plane by means of the physical senses. For
instance, the person is thus able to perceive things occurring on the
astral plane; to read the Akashic Records of the past; to perceive things
that are happening in other parts of the world; to see past happenings as
well; and in cases of peculiar development, to catch glimpses of the
future, though this is far rarer than the other forms of astral sight.

Again, by means of clairaudience, the person may hear the things of the
astral world, past as well as present, and in rare cases, the future. The
explanation is the same in each case--merely the receiving of vibrations
on the astral plane instead of on the physical plane. In the same way,
the astral senses of smelling, tasting, and feeling operate. But though we
have occasional instances of astral feeling, in certain phases of psychic
phenomena, we have practically no manifestation of astral smelling or
tasting, although the astral senses are there ready for use. It is only in
instances of travelling in the astral body that the last two mentioned
astral senses, viz., smell and taste, are manifested.

The phenomena of telepathy, or thought transference, occurs on both the
physical and the mental plane. On the physical plane it is more or less
spontaneous and erratic in manifestation; while on the astral plane it is
as clear, reliable and responsive to demand as is astral sight, etc.

The ordinary person has but occasional flashes of astral sensing, and as a
rule is not able to experience the phenomenon at will. The trained
occultist, on the contrary, is able to shift from one set of senses to the
other, by a simple act or effort of will, whenever he may wish to do so.
Advanced occultists are often able to function on both physical and astral
planes at the same time, though they do not often desire to do so. To
vision astrally, the trained occultist merely shifts his sensory mechanism
from physical to astral, or vice versa, just as the typewriter operator
shifts from the small-letter type to the capitals, by simply touching the
shift-key of his machine.

Many persons suppose that it is necessary to travel on the astral plane,
in the astral body, in order to use the astral senses. This is a mistake.
In instances of clairvoyance, astral visioning, psychometry, etc., the
occultist remains in his physical body, and senses the phenomena of the
astral plane quite readily, by means of the astral senses, just as he is
able to sense the phenomena of the physical plane when he uses the
physical organs--quite more easily, in fact, in many instances. It is not
even necessary for the occultist to enter into the trance condition, in
the majority of cases.

Travel in the astral body is quite another phase of occult phenomena, and
is far more difficult to manifest. The student should never attempt to
travel in the astral body except under the instruction of some competent
instructor.

In Crystal Gazing, the occultist merely employs the crystal in order to
concentrate his power, and to bring to a focus his astral vision. There is
no supernatural virtue in the crystal itself--it is merely a means to an
end; a piece of useful apparatus to aid in the production of certain
phenomena.

In Psychometry some object is used in order to bring the occulist "en
rapport" with the person or thing associated with it. But it is the astral
senses which are employed in describing either the past environment of the
thing, or else the present or past doings of the person in question, etc.
In short, the object is merely the loose end of the psychic ball of twine
which the psychometrist proceeds to wind or unwind at will. Psychometry
is merely one form of astral seeing; just as is crystal gazing.

In what is known as Telekinesis, or movement at a distance, there is found
the employment of both astral sensing, and astral will action accompanied
in many cases by actual projection of a portion of the substance of the
astral body.

In the case of Clairvoyance, we have an instance of the simplest form of
astral seeing, without the necessity of the "associated object" of
psychometry, or the focal point of the crystal in crystal gazing.

This is true not only of the ordinary form of clairvoyance, in which the
occultist sees astrally the happenings and doings at some distant point,
at the moment of observation; it is also true of what is known as past
clairvoyance, or astral seeing of past events; and in the seeing of future
events, as in prophetic vision, etc. These are all simply different forms
of one and the same thing.

Surely, some of you may say, "These things are supernatural, far above the
realm of natural law--and yet this man would have us believe otherwise."
Softly, softly, dear reader, do not jump at conclusions so readily. What
do you know about the limits of natural law and phenomena? What right have
you to assert that all beyond your customary range of sense experience is
outside of Nature? Do you not realize that you are attempting to place a
limit upon Nature, which in reality is illimitable?

The man of a generation back of the present one would have been equally
justified in asserting that the marvels of wireless telegraphy were
supernatural, had he been told of the possibility of their manifestation.
Going back a little further, the father of that man would have said the
same thing regarding the telephone, had anyone been so bold as to have
prophesied it. Going back still another generation, imagine the opinion of
some of the old men of that time regarding the telegraph. And yet these
things are simply the discovery and application of certain of Nature's
wonderful powers and forces.

Is it any more unreasonable to suppose that Nature has still a mine of
undiscovered treasure in the mind and constitution of man, as well as in
inorganic nature? No, friends, these things are as natural as the physical
senses, and not a whit more of a miracle. It is only that we are
accustomed to one, and not to the other, that makes the astral senses seem
more wonderful than the physical. Nature's workings are all
wonderful--none more so than the other. All are beyond our absolute
conception, when we get down to their real essence. So let us keep an open
mind!




LESSON II.

TELEPATHY vs. CLAIRVOYANCE.


In this work I shall use the term "clairvoyance" in its broad sense of
"astral perception," as distinguished from perception by means of the
physical senses. As we proceed, you will see the general and special
meanings of the term, so there is no necessity for a special definition or
illustration of the term at this time.

By "telepathy," I mean the sending and receiving of thought messages, and
mental and emotional states, consciously or unconsciously, by means of
what may be called "the sixth sense" of the physical plane. There is, of
course, a form of thought transference on the astral plane, but this I
include under the general term of clairvoyance, for reasons which will be
explained later on.

You will remember that in the preceding chapter I told you that in
addition to the five ordinary physical senses of man there were also two
other physical senses comparatively undeveloped in the average person.
These two extra physical senses are, respectively, (1) the sense of the
presence of other living things; and (2) the telepathic sense. As I also
told you, these two extra physical senses have their astral counterparts.
They also have certain physical organs which are not generally recognized
by physiologists or psychologists, but which are well known to all
occultists. I shall now consider the first of the two above-mentioned
extra physical senses, in order to clear the way for our consideration of
the question of the distinction between ordinary telepathy and that form
of clairvoyance which is its astral counterpart.

There is in every human being a sense which is not generally recognized as
such, although nearly every person has had more or less experience
regarding its workings. I refer to the sense of the presence of other
living things, separate and apart from the operation of any of the five
ordinary physical senses. I ask you to understand that I am not claiming
that this is a higher sense than the other physical senses, or that it has
come to man in a high state of evolution. On the contrary, this sense came
to living things far back in the scale of evolution. It is possessed by
the higher forms of the lower animals, such as the horse, dog, and the
majority of the wild beasts. Savage and barbaric men have it more highly
developed than it is in the case of the civilized man. In fact, this
physical sense may be termed almost vestigal in civilized man, because he
has not actively used it for many generations. For that matter, the
physical sense of smell is also deficient in man, and for the same reason,
whereas in the case of the lower animals, and savage man, the sense of
smell is very keen. I mention this for fear of misunderstanding. In my
little book, "The Astral World," I have said: "All occultists know that
man really has seven senses, instead of merely five, though the
additional two senses are not sufficiently developed for use in the
average person (though the occultist generally unfolds them into use)."
Some have taken this to mean that the occultist develops these two extra
physical senses, just as he does certain higher psychic or astral
faculties. But this is wrong. The occultist, in such case, merely
re-awakens these two senses which have been almost lost to the race. By
use and exercise he then develops them to a wonderful proficiency, for use
on the physical plane.

Now, this sense of the presence of other living beings is very well
developed in the lower animals, particularly in those whose safety depends
upon the knowledge of the presence of their natural enemies. As might be
expected, the wild animals have it more highly developed than do the
domesticated animals. But even among the latter, we find instances of this
sense being in active use--in the case of dogs, horses, geese, etc.,
especially. Who of us is not familiar with the strange actions of the dog,
or the horse, when the animal senses the unseen and unheard presence of
some person or animal? Very often we would scold or punish the animal for
its peculiar actions, simply because we are not able to see what is
worrying it. How often does the dog start suddenly, and bristle up its
hair, when nothing is in sight, or within hearing distance. How often does
the horse grow "skittish," or even panicky, when there is nothing within
sight or hearing. Domestic fowls, especially geese, manifest an uneasiness
at the presence of strange persons or animals, though they may not be
able to see or hear them. It is a matter of history that this sense, in a
flock of geese, once saved ancient Rome from an attack of the enemy. The
night was dark and stormy, and the trained eyesight and keen hearing of
the Roman outposts failed to reveal the approach of the enemy. But, the
keen sense of the geese felt the presence of strange men, and they started
to cackle loudly, aroused the guard, and Rome was saved. Skeptical persons
have sought to explain this historical case by the theory that the geese
heard the approaching enemy. But this explanation will not serve, for the
Roman soldiers were marching about on their posts and guard-duty, and the
geese remained silent until they sensed the approach of the small number
of the enemy's scouts, when they burst into wild cries. The ancient
Romans, themselves, were under no illusion about the matter--they
recognized the existence of some unusual power in the geese, and they gave
the animals the full credit therefor.

Hunters in wild and strange lands have told us that often when they were
lying concealed for the purpose of shooting the wild animals when they
came within range, they have witnessed instances of the existence of this
strange faculty in the wild beasts. Though they could not see the
concealed hunters, nor smell them (as the wind was in the other direction)
all of a sudden one or more of the animals (generally an old female) would
start suddenly, and a shiver would be seen to pass over its body; then it
would utter a low warning note, and away would fly the pack. Nearly every
hunter has had the experience of watching his expected game, when all of a
sudden it would start off with a nervous jerk, and without waiting to
sniff the air, as is usual, would bolt precipitately from the scene.
Moreover, many beasts of prey are known to sense the presence of their
natural prey, even when the wind is in the other direction, and there is
no sound or movement made by the crouching, fearstricken animal. Certain
birds seem to sense the presence of particular worms upon which they feed,
though the latter be buried several inches in the earth, or in the bark of
trees.

Savage man also has this faculty developed, as all travellers and
explorers well know. They are as keen as a wild animal to sense the
nearness of enemies, or, in some cases, the approach of man-eating beasts.
This does not mean that that these savages are more highly developed than
is civilized man--quite the reverse. This is the explanation: when man
became more civilized, and made himself more secure from his wild-beast
enemies, as well as from the sudden attacks of his human enemies, he began
to use this sense less and less. Finally, in the course of many
generations, it became almost atrophied from disuse, and ceased reporting
to the brain, or other nerve centres. Or, if you prefer viewing it from
another angle, it may be said that the nerve centres, and brain, began to
pay less and less attention to the reports of this sense (trusting more to
sight and hearing) until the consciousness failed to awaken to the
reports. You know how your consciousness will finally refuse to be
awakened by familiar sounds (such as the noise of machinery in the shop,
or ordinary noises in the house), although the ears receive the
sound-waves.

Well, this is the way in the case of this neglected sense--for the two
reasons just mentioned, the average person is almost unaware of its
existence. Almost unaware I have said--not totally unaware. For probably
every one of us has had experiences in which we have actually "felt" the
presence of some strange person about the premises, or place. The effect
of the report of this sense is particularly noticed in the region of the
solar plexus, or the pit of the stomach. It manifests in a peculiar,
unpleasant feeling of "gone-ness" in that region--it produces a feeling of
"something wrong," which disturbs one in a strange way. This is generally
accompanied by a "bristling up," or "creepy" feeling along the spine. The
organs registering the presence of a strange or alien creature consist of
certain delicate nerves of the surface of the skin, generally connected
with the roots of the downy hair of the body--or resting where the hair
roots would naturally be, in the case of a hairless skin. These seem to
report directly to the solar-plexus, which then acts quickly by reflex
action on the other parts of the body, causing an instinctive feeling to
either fly the scene or else to crouch and hide oneself. This feeling, as
may be seen at once, is an inheritance from our savage ancestors, or
perhaps from our lowly-animal ancestral roots. It is a most unpleasant
feeling, and the race escapes much discomfort by reason of its comparative
absence.

I have said that occultists have developed, or rather re-developed this
sense. They do this in order to have a harmonious well-developed
seven-fold sense system. It increases their general "awareness." Certain
other knowledge of the occultist neutralizes the unpleasant features of
the manifestation of this sense, and he finds it often a very valuable
adjunct to his senses of seeing and hearing, particularly in the cases in
which he is approached by persons having antagonistic or hostile feelings
toward him, as in such cases this faculty is particularly active. In
connection with the telepathic sense (to be described a little further on)
this sense operates to give a person that sense of warning when approached
by another person whose feelings are not friendly to him, no matter how
friendly the outward appearance of that person may be. These two extra
senses co-operate to give a person that instinctive feeling of warning,
which all of us know in our own experience.

This particular, as well as the telepathic sense, may be cultivated or
developed by anyone who wishes to take the time and trouble to accomplish
the work. The principle is simple--merely the same principle that one uses
in developing any of the other physical attributes, namely, use and
exercise. The first step (a) is the recognition of the existence of the
sense itself; then (b) the attention given to its reports; then (c)
frequent use and exercise. Just think of how you would proceed to develop
any of the five ordinary senses--the hearing, sight, or touch, for
instance--then follow the same process in the cultivation of this extra
sense, or two senses, and you will accomplish the same kind of results.

Now, let us consider the other extra physical sense--the "telepathic"
sense, or sense of becoming aware of the thought-waves, or emotional
waves, of other persons. Now, as strange as this may appear to some
persons--the most of persons in fact--this telepathic faculty is not a
"higher" faculty or sense, but is really a comparatively low one. Just
like the sense just described, it is possessed in a higher degree by many
of the lower animals, and by primitive and savage man. That which really
is "higher" in this kind of psychic phenomena is the manifestation of that
higher form of telepathy--by use of the astral counterpart of this
sense--which we shall consider, later, under the name of clairvoyance, for
this is really a particular phase of clairvoyance.

As strange as it may appear to some of you, the lower animals possess a
kind of telepathic sense. An animal is usually aware of your feelings
toward it, and your purposes regarding it. Domestic animals lose some of
this by generations of confinement, while the wild animals have the sense
highly developed. But even some of the domestic animals have more or less
of it. You will readily recognize this fact if you have ever tried to
"cut out" a certain animal from a herd or flock. You will find that the
animal in some way has sensed your designs upon it, no matter how
indirectly you approach it, and it will begin circling around the other
animals, twisting in and out in its endeavors to be lost to your sight.
The other animals, likewise, will seem to know that you are after only
that particular one, and will manifest but little fright or distrust,
comparatively.

I have frequently seen this thing, in my own country and in others, among
poultry raisers. The poultryman will think, to himself, "Now, I am going
to get that black hen with the yellow legs--that fat, clumsy one," and he
will move toward the flock slowly and with an air of unconcern. But, lo!
as soon as he gets near the creatures, that black hen will be seen edging
her way to the outer circle of the flock, on the opposite side from the
man. When the man moves around to her side, she will be found to have
plunged into the crowd, and it is hard to find her. Sometimes she will
actually try to sneak off, and conceal herself in some dark corner, or
back of some large object. Every poultryman will smile when this
occurrence is mentioned to him--he knows by experience that hens have a
way of sensing what he has in his mind regarding them.

Moreover, as every farmer knows, the crow family has a most uncanny way of
sensing the intentions of the farmer who is trying to destroy them, and
shows great sagacity in defeating those intentions. But, while the crow is
a very intelligent bird--one of the wisest of the bird family, in
fact--it obtains its knowledge of what is in the mind of the man not alone
from "figuring on his intentions," but rather from that instinctive
sensing of his mental states. The hen, as all know, is a very stupid bird,
showing but little intelligent activity. But, nevertheless, she is very
quick about sensing the poultryman's designs on her, though generally very
stupid about planning out a skillful escape.

Every owner of dogs, cats and horses, has had many opportunities for
observing the manifestation of this sense on the part of those animals.
Every dog feels the emotional states of his owner, and others. The horse
knows when his owner seeks to throw the halter over his neck, or when, on
the contrary, he is merely walking through the field. Cats sense their
owners' feelings and thoughts, and often resent them. Of course, the lower
animals can sense merely elementary mental states, and generally _only_
emotional states, as their minds are not developed so as to interpret the
more complex mental states. Primitive men likewise almost instinctively
sense the feelings and designs of other men. They do not reason the thing
out, but rather merely "feel" the ideas and designs of the others. The
women of the lower races are more adept in interpreting these sense
reports than are the men. Women are more sensitive, as a rule, than are
men--on any point on the scale of development.

When we come to consider ordinary telepathy in the case of men of
civilized countries, we find a more complex state of affairs. While
civilized man, as a whole, has lost some of the quick telepathic
perception of the lower races, he has, in some exceptional cases, acquired
a faculty of receiving and interpreting more complex thought-forms and
mental states. The investigations of the Society for Psychical Research,
and those of private investigators as well, have shown us that a picture
of a complicated geometrical design held in the mind of one person may be
carried to and received by the mind of another person, who reproduces the
design on paper. In the same way, complicated thoughts have been
transmitted and received. But these are only exceptional cases. In many
cases this sense seems almost dead in the ordinary civilized individual,
except when aroused in exceptional cases.

But, nevertheless, the majority of persons have occasional flashes of
telepathy--just enough to make them realize that "there is something in
it." The renewed interest in the subject, of late years, has directed the
public mind to the phenomena of telepathy, and, consequently, more persons
are now taking note of the cases of thought-transference coming under
their personal notice. It must be remembered, of course, that all of us
are constantly receiving thought-waves, and feeling thought-influence,
unconsciously. I am speaking now only of the conscious perception of the
thought-waves.

Many investigators have so developed their telepathic sense that they are
able, at times, to obtain wonderful test results. But, it has been a
source of disappointment to many of them to discover that at other times,
under apparently similar conditions, their success was very slight. So
true is this that many authorities have accepted the theory that telepathy
is more or less spontaneous, and cannot be produced to order. This theory
is true as far as it goes, but there is a side of the case that these
investigators overlook, probably because of their lack of the occult
principles involved in the phenomena. I mean this: that their most
brilliant successes have been obtained by reason of their unconscious
"switching on" of the astral telepathic sense, the clairvoyant sense.
While in this condition, they obtained startling results; but the next
time they tried, they failed to awaken the astral sense, and, therefore,
had to depend entirely upon the physical telepathic sense, and,
consequently, their results were comparatively poor.

You will understand the difference and distinction between physical-sense
telepathy, and astral-sense telepathy, if you will carefully consider the
nature of each, as I shall now present it to you. I ask your close
attention to what I shall have to say on this subject in the remaining
pages of this chapter. Do not pass over these explanations as "dry," for
unless you have a clear fundamental understanding of the thing, you will
never be able to get the best results. This is true of every phase of
learning, physical as well as psychical--one must get started right, in
order to obtain the best results.

In the first place, every thought process, every emotional activity,
every creation of ideas, is accompanied by a manifestation of force--in
fact, is the result of the manifestation of a force. Without entering at
all into the question of what mind is, in itself, we may rest firmly on
the natural fact that every manifestation of mental or emotional activity
is the result of an action of the brain or nervous system, manifesting in
a form of vibrations. Just as in the case of the manifestation of
electricity in which certain chemical elements are consumed, or
transformed, so in the case of mental or emotional activity there is a
consuming or transformation of the substance of which the nervous system
is composed. When I say "nervous system" in this connection, I include the
brain, or brains of man--for these are but a part of his great nervous
system in which all emotional or mental activity is manifested.

Moreover, just as there is no real destruction of matter in any of
Nature's processes--all seeming destruction being but a transformation--so
in the case before us there is a transformation of the energy released in
the thought or emotional process. We may grasp this idea more clearly if
we consider what takes place into transformation of electrical energy. For
instance, transmit a strong current of electricity over a fine wire, or
filament of carbon, and lo! the current is transformed into light. Use
another kind of channel of transmission, and the current is transformed
into heat. Every electric light, or electric heating apparatus is proof
of this. In the same way, the electric current is sent into space in the
form of wireless waves. These waves coming in contact with certain forms
of apparatus are transformed into forms of force which are registered and
interpreted by the wireless operator.

In the same way, the telepathic waves of energy are sent forth by the
activity released by the thought or emotion state. These waves travel in
every direction, and when they come in contact with physical apparatus
sufficiently sensitive to register them, they may be reproduced or
retransformed into thought or mental states similar to those which
originally sent them forth. You talk into the receiver of the telephone,
and the sound waves are transformed into waves of electricity. These
electric waves travel over the wires, and on reaching the other end of the
telephone circuit are again transformed into sound-waves which are heard
by the ear of the listener. Well, then, when your brain sends out thought
waves, these travel until they are received by the apparatus in the brain
of another person, when they are re-transformed into thoughts of the same
kind that originally caused the thought-waves. I will have much more to
say on this subject in the next chapter. I will pause here to point out
the difference between the phenomena of this form of telepathy, and the
higher form which is really a phase of clairvoyance.

Now, in the case of what may be called a clairvoyant-telepathy, or astral
telepathy, the ordinary thought-waves play but a small part. Instead of
these, there is a transmission of force along the channels of the astral
plane. It is almost impossible to describe the phenomena of the astral
plane in the terms of the physical. I may illustrate the matter, in a
general way, by saying that is something like your astral self actually
extending itself out until it touches the astral self of the other person,
and thus actually "feels" the astral activities there, instead of it being
a case of something like waves travelling along space between brain and
brain. Do you get this clearly? This is about as near to it as I can
explain it to you at this place. Telepathy is simply a matter of the
transmission and receiving of waves of vibratory force which have
travelled along the ether between two persons. But clairvoyance or
astral-telepathy is something like your mind being extended out until it
actually touches the mind of the other person and sees what is there.

I shall have much to say regarding the working out of the processes of
clairvoyance, as we proceed. I have merely given the above explanation for
the purpose of distinguishing between ordinary telepathy and clairvoyance,
so as to prevent you from falling into a common error. Now let us consider
the phenomena of ordinary telepathy--this is very wonderful in itself,
although it is on a lower plane of activity than its astral or clairvoyant
counterpart.




LESSON III.

TELEPATHY EXPLAINED.


Telepathy, meaning Thought-Transference, bears a misleading title.
Literally translated, it means "suffering at a distance," or, perhaps,
"feeling pain at a distance." The name should really indicate "knowing at
a distance," in order to be properly descriptive. But as the term has
acquired a forced meaning by reason of years of usage, it will probably be
continued in popular favor. After all, names do not count, so long as the
meaning is accepted and understood.

While the term itself has been generally used in the sense of conscious
and deliberate sending and receiving of thought-waves, there is a far
wider field of phenomena really covered by it, viz., the unconscious
sending and receiving of mental and emotional vibrations. I shall take up
this phase of the subject in a moment, after I have called your attention
to the mechanism whereby the waves of thought and emotion are transmitted.

In the last chapter, you will remember that I called your attention to the
fact that there is a manifestation of energy or force (in the form of
vibrations) in every mental or emotional state. This is true not only in
the case of deep thought or vivid feeling, but also in the case of general
mental "feelings," and emotional states. During such manifestations there
is a radiation of mental or emotional vibrations from the brain or nervous
centres of the system, which flows out in all directions just as do light
and wireless electricity. The principal seats or centres of these
radiations are (1) the several brains of man, viz., the cerebrum,
cerebellum, and the medulla oblongata, respectfully; and (2) the several
great centres of nerve substance in the human system, called the plexi,
such as the solar plexus, etc.

The vibrations arising from emotional excitement are sent out principally
from the plexi, or great centres of the sympathetic nervous system. Those
arising from the more strictly mental states emanate from certain centres
and points of the brain, or brains, of the person manifesting them.
Certain forms of these vibrations constitute the real essence of what is
generally called "human magnetism," which will be treated upon in the
proper place in these lessons.

I do not think it advisable to go into the technical details of the
generation and mechanism of transmission of these thought and emotional
vibrations, in these lessons. To understand the same would require a
technical knowledge of physiology and organic chemistry, which is not
possessed by the average person. Moreover, such details are neither
interesting nor instructive to the general student of occultism. But, I
think it proper to give at least a brief description of the receiving of
such vibratory-waves by other individuals.

In the first place, every great plexus, or groups of nerve ganglia, in the
human system is a receiving station, as well as a sending station. A
person manifesting strong emotional excitement tends to awaken similar
states in the nervous centres of other persons in whom the conditions are
favorable. This explains why the vibrations of anger, fear, panic, are so
contagious. It also explains the strong effect of the vibrations emanating
from the nerve centres controlling the reproductive system, in certain
cases of strong sexual excitation. Each human sympathetic nervous system
contains many receiving stations where emotional vibrations are received,
and where they tend to be transformed into similar feeling in the
receiving system, unless neutralized by other mental and emotional states
in the person.

When we come to consider the apparatus by which is received the vibrations
arising from what may be called "purely mental" operations of the brain,
such as intellectual thought, constructive imagination, etc., we find a
more specialized arrangement, as might be expected. There are several
minor receiving points of mental vibrations, regarding which I do not
consider it worth while to go into detail, because of the technical
features involved. The principal apparatus for receiving thought
vibrations of this kind is that which is known as the "pineal gland,"
which I shall now describe.

The pineal gland is a peculiar mass of nervous substance which is embedded
in the human brain, in a position near the middle of the skull almost
directly above the extreme top of the spinal column. It is shaped like a
small cone; and is of a reddish-gray color. It lies in front of the
cerebellum, and is attached to the floor of the third ventricle of the
brain. It contains a small quantity of peculiar particles of gritty,
sand-like substance, which are sometimes called "brain-sand." It derives
its scientific name from its shape, which, as I have said, resembles a
pine-cone. Physiologists are at sea regarding the function of this strange
organ, and generally content themselves with the statement that "its
functions are not understood." But occultists know that the pineal gland,
with its peculiar arrangement of nerve-cell corpuscles, and its tiny
grains of "brain-sand," is the physical telepathic receiving instrument.
Students of wireless telegraphy have noticed a startling resemblance
between the pineal gland and a part of the receiving instrument employed
in wireless telegraphy.

The thought vibrations coming in contact with the nervous system of the
receiving person, set up a peculiar vibration in the substance of the
pineal gland and thus the first step in the transformation of these
vibrations into thought-forms in the mind of the person is under way. The
remainder of the process is too technical, both in the physiological as
well as in the occult sense, to be taken up in detail at this place. The
student will do well to get the idea of the workings of wireless
telegraphy well fixed in his mind, for this will set up the right
conception of the working of ordinary telepathy, without the necessity of
complicated technical diagrams and descriptions.

And, now then, let us see what results from the sending forth and
receiving of these mental and emotional waves of force and energy. It is a
most interesting subject, I assure you. While the phenomena of the astral
plane is probably more fascinating to the average student, I would impress
upon you the importance of mastering the occult phenomena of the physical
plane, before passing on to that of the higher planes.

In the first place, as all occultists know, each person is constantly
surrounded with what has been called an "atmosphere" composed of mental
and emotional vibrations which are emanated from his personality. The
atmosphere of each person depends upon the general character of the
thoughts and feelings of the person in question. Consequently, as no two
persons are precisely alike in character, it follows that no two personal
atmospheres are exactly alike. Each person has a psychic atmosphere of his
or her own. These atmospheric vibrations do not extend very far from the
presence of the person, and, consequently affect only those coming near to
him.

In the same way, every group or crowd of persons has its own psychic
atmosphere, composed of a blending of the individual psychic atmospheres
of the persons composing the crowd, group or assemblage, and representing
the general average of the thought and feelings of the crowd. There are no
two group atmospheres exactly alike, for the reason that no two groups of
persons, large or small, are exactly alike. Actors know that each audience
which they face has its own psychic atmosphere, and the actors are
affected by it. Preachers, lawyers, and speakers in general are quite
aware of this fact, and freely admit it, though they may not be acquainted
with the causes or laws governing the phenomena.

Following the same psychic law, it will be found that every town or large
city, or even every small village or section of a larger town, will be
found to have its own distinctive psychic atmosphere, which is very
perceptible to strangers visiting the place, and which affect those who
take up their residence in the place. In large cities, it has been noticed
that every building has its own peculiar vibrations which arise from the
general character of those occupying it. Different church buildings
likewise reflect the character of the general habits of thought and
feeling of those worshipping in them. Likewise, certain business streets
have pleasant or unpleasant vibrations in their atmosphere, from the same
causes. Every person recognizes the truth of these statements, though but
few are able to account for the facts in a scientific manner.

The beginner in the study of psychic phenomena often asks how these things
can be, when the thought which has occasioned the vibrations have long
since passed away. The explanation is simple, when properly explained. It
is something like this: just as heat remains in a room after the stove has
ceased to throw out heat-waves, so do the vibrations of thought and
feeling persist long after the thought or feeling has died away. Or, if
you prefer a more material illustration, we may say that if a package of
perfumery has been opened in a room, and then removed, the air will remain
charged with the odor for a long time afterwards.

So, you see, the same principle applies in the case of psychic vibrations.
The person carries around with him the general atmosphere of his
characteristic mental and emotional vibrations. And, in the same way, the
house, store, church, street, town, or city, etc., is permeated with the
psychic vibrations of those who have frequented them. Nearly every one
realizes the different feeling that impresses him when he enters a strange
house, apartment, store or church. Each one has its own difference of
psychic effect. And, so does each person create his or her psychic effect
upon those coming in contact with him or her, or who comes into his or her
presence or vicinity.

The next question asked by the thoughtful new student is this: If persons
are constantly sending forth psychic vibrations, and if such vibrations
persist for some time, why are we not overwhelmed with the force of them;
and why are they not all so mixed up as to lose all their effect. I shall
now answer this very important question.

In the first place, though we are constantly affected more or less by the
multitude of psychic vibrations beating upon us, still the greater part of
them do not consciously impress us. For an example, we have but to
consider how few of the sounds or sights of a busy street are impressed
upon our consciousness. We hear and see only a few of the things which
attract our attention and interest. The rest are lost to us, although our
eyes and ears receive them all. In the same way, we are impressed only by
the stronger vibrations which reach us, and then only by those which we
have attracted to ourselves, or which prove attractive to us by reason of
our own likes and dislikes.

In the second place, the effect of certain thought vibrations is
neutralized by the effect of the vibrations of thoughts of an opposite
character. Just as a mixture of black and white produces the neutral color
of grey, so do two currents of opposing thought vibrations tend to resolve
themselves into a neutral vibration which has little or no effect upon
those coming in contact with them. You may think of numerous
correspondences to this in the world of material things. For instance, a
mixture of very hot and very cold water, will produce a neutral lukewarm
liquid, neither hot nor cold. In the same way, two things of opposing
taste characteristics, when blended, will produce a neutral taste having
but little effect upon one. The principle is universal, and is readily
understood.

In the third place, there is that which we may call an "affinity" between
thoughts and feelings of a similar character. Not only do the vibrations
of similar thoughts tend to coalesce and combine; but, more than this,
each one of us attracts to himself or herself the thought vibrations which
are in general accord with corresponding thoughts in our own minds, or
feelings in our own nature. Like attracts like. In the same way, the
character of our thoughts and feelings act to repel thought or emotional
vibrations of an opposite or inharmonious nature. As all occultists know,
everyone draws thought vibrations in harmony with his or her own; and also
repels thought vibrations of an inharmonious nature.

These are the general laws and principles governing the phenomena of this
phase of telepathic vibrations. There is much more to be said on the
subject, of course, but if you will note carefully the leading principles
and laws of manifestation just mentioned, you will be able to reason
correctly regarding any phase of this class of phenomena which may come
before you for attention. Once you learn a general rule, the rest becomes
merely a matter of application and interpretation. Let us now proceed to a
consideration of other phases of the general subject of telepathic
influence.

We now come to the phase of what may be called direct telepathy--that is
where a thought is consciously, and more or less purposely, directed
toward another person. We come across many interesting cases of this kind
where persons find themselves thinking intently of certain other persons,
and afterwards are told by the other persons that "I found myself thinking
intently about you, at such and such a time," etc. In some of these cases
it is difficult to determine which one started the thinking. Again, how
often do we find ourselves thinking of a person, when all of a sudden the
person comes into sight. Again, we think intently and earnestly about a
certain question; and then, all of a sudden, other folks whom we meet
begin talking to us about the same thing. These instances are too common
to need more than a passing notice.

A little more purpose is displayed in that class of phenomena in which we
intently wish that a certain person shall do a certain thing, and lo! we
soon learn that that certain person has done it. A number of years ago, a
popular writer wrote an article in which he mentioned what seemed to him
to be a curious instance of some form of mental influence or telepathy. He
said that he had found out that if he would sit down and carefully write a
letter to some person from whom he had not heard for a long time, and then
destroy the letter instead of sending it, he would be almost certain to
receive a letter from that person within a few days. He did not attempt to
account for the phenomenon, he merely called the attention of his readers
to it. Many persons have followed the suggestion, often with very
wonderful results. There is nothing miraculous, or supernatural about such
occurrences. It is merely one phase of telepathy. The concentrated thought
of the writer of the letter is directed toward the other person, and that
person begins to think of the first one; then he thinks he will write to
him; then he actually does write. Distance, space, and direction have no
importance in this experiment--it is not necessary to even know where the
second person is, in fact.

There are often found persons so closely in psychic harmony with each
other that they very often are able to ask questions and receive answers
from each other, even though great distances separate them. Some
particular times there is a better psychic harmony existing between the
same persons than is found at other times. All this, of course, affects
the success of the experiment. It is surprising what wonderful results
along these lines may be obtained by almost any person of average
intelligence, after a little careful, patient, conscientious practice.

But there have been phenomena obtained as the result of long series of
careful experiments which are, in a way, even more wonderful than these
somewhat less deliberate experiments just mentioned. I allude to the
experiments of a number of earnest, careful scientific students, who
surrounded themselves with every precaution against over-enthusiasm,
fraud, and coincidence. Prominent among this class of investigations we
find those conducted by the Society for Psychical Research, of England,
which really established a firm basis for the work of other investigators
who followed the general methods of the said society. In the following
chapter, I shall give you a somewhat extended statement of the results of
such investigations, because this information is important to every
student of psychic phenomena, not only because it establishes a firm
scientific basis for his studies and beliefs, but also because it gives
him important information which he may apply in the course of his own
experimental work.

I may mention that the investigations into the subject of telepathy, and
kindred subjects, under the auspices of the society just mentioned, were
conducted by men of careful scientific training and experience, and under
the general supervision and approval of the officers of the society, among
which have been numbered such eminent men as Prof. Henry Sidgwick, of
Cambridge University; Prof. Balfour Stewart, a Fellow of the Royal Society
of England; Rt. Hon. A.J. Balfour, the eminent English statesman; Prof.
William James, the eminent American psychologist; Sir William Crookes, the
great chemist and discoverer of physical laws, who invented the celebrated
"Crookes' Tubes," without which the discovery of the X Rays,
radio-activity, etc., would have been impossible; Frederick W.H. Myers,
the celebrated explorer of the astral planes, and writer upon psychic
phenomena; Sir Oliver Lodge, the popular English scientist; and other men
of international reputation and high standing. The character of these men
at once gives the stamp of honesty and scientific accuracy to all the work
of the society.

In order that you may understand the spirit which animated these
scientific investigators in their work of the exploration of this new and
strange region of Nature, I ask you to carefully read the following words
of the presidential address of Sir William Crookes, before the Royal
Society, at Bristol, England, in 1898. Remember, please, that this address
was made before an assemblage of distinguished scientists, many of them
rank materialists and, quite skeptical of all occult phenomena--this was
nearly twenty years ago, remember. Sir William Crookes, facing this
gathering, as its president, said:

"Were I now introducing for the first time these inquiries to the world of
science, I should choose a starting point different from that of old
(where we formerly began). It would be well to begin with Telepathy; with
that fundamental law, as I believe it to be, that thoughts and images may
be transferred from one mind to another without the agency of the
recognized organs of sense--that knowledge may enter the human mind
without being communicated in any hitherto known or recognized ways. * * *
If telepathy takes place, we have two physical facts--the physical change
in the brain of A, the suggestor, and the analogous physical change in the
brain of B, the recipient of the suggestion. Between these two physical
events there must exist a train of physical causes. * * * It is
unscientific to call in the aid of mysterious agencies, when with every
fresh advance in knowledge it is shown that either vibrations have powers
and attributes abundantly able to any demand--even the transmission of
thought.

"It is supposed by some physiologists that the essential cells of nerves
do not actually touch, but are separated by a narrow gap which widens in
sleep while it narrows almost to extinction during mental activity. This
condition is so singularly like a Branly or Lodge coherer (a device which
led to the discovery of wireless telegraphy) as to suggest a further
analogy. The structure of brain and nerve being similar, it is conceivable
that there may be present masses of such nerve coherers in the brain,
whose special function it may be to receive impulses brought from without,
through the connecting sequence of ether waves of appropriate order of
magnitude.

"Roentgen has familiarized us with an order of vibrations of extreme
minuteness as compared with the smallest waves with which we have hitherto
been acquainted: and there is no reason to suppose that we have here
reached the limit of frequency. It is known that the action of thought is
accompanied by certain molecular movements in the brain, and here we have
physical vibrations capable from their extreme minuteness of acting direct
upon individual molecules, while their rapidity approaches that of
internal and external movements of the atoms themselves. A formidable
range of phenomena must be scientifically sifted before we effectually
grasp a faculty so strange, so bewildering, and for ages so inscrutable,
as the direct action of mind upon mind.

"In the old Egyptian days, a well known inscription was carved over the
portal of the Temple of Isis: 'I am whatever has been, is, or ever will
be; and my veil no man hath yet lifted.' Not thus do modern seekers after
truth confront Nature--the word that stands for the baffling mysteries of
the Universe. Steadily, unflinchingly, we strive to pierce the inmost
heart of Nature, from what she is to reconstruct what she has been, and
to prophesy what she shall be. Veil after veil we have lifted, and her
face grows more beautiful, august and wonderful, with every barrier that
is withdrawn."

You will notice that this address made nearly twenty years ago, and from
the standpoint of physical science is in full accord with the ideas of
occultism as old as the hills. And yet, the speaker had worked out the
idea independently. He also investigated higher forms of psychic
phenomena, with results that startled the world. But, you will notice that
he does not attempt to give any other than purely physical laws the credit
for the ordinary phenomena of telepathy. And he was thoroughly right in
this, as we have seen. He escaped the common error of confusing
physical-sense phenomena with the phenomena of the astral-senses. Each
plane has its own phenomena--and each class is surely wonderful enough.
And, again, remember that both physical and astral phenomena are purely
natural; there is no need for seeking any supernatural agencies to account
for these natural facts.




LESSON IV.

SCIENTIFIC TELEPATHY.


The investigators of the Society for Psychical Research, of England,
started by giving a broad definition of Telepathy, as follows: "Telepathy
is the communication of impressions of any kind from one mind to another,
independently of the recognized channels of sense." They took the rational
position that the actual distance between the projector and the recipient
of the telepathic message is not material; and that all that is required
is such a separation of the two persons that no known operation of the
senses can bridge the space between them. They wisely held that telepathy
between two persons in the same room is as much telepathy as when the two
persons are located at opposite sides of the world.

The investigators then ruled out all instances of thought-transmission in
which there was even the slightest muscular contact between the projector
and the recipient. They held that though there might be genuine telepathy
in such cases, nevertheless, there was always the possibility of fraud or
collusion, or of unconscious muscular action on the part of the projector.
They demanded absolute and actual separation of the two persons, in order
that their experiments might be above suspicion. They were wise in this,
for while there is undoubtedly a psychic communication in the cases in
which there is the slight physical connection between the two persons (as
I shall point out to you a little further on), still the element of doubt
or suspicion must be entirely eliminated from a scientific test, in order
to render it valuable and valid.

They, therefore, confined their investigations in Telepathy to the two
following classes, viz.: (1) where actions are performed without physical
contact with the person willing; and (2) where some number, word, or card
is guessed apparently without any of the ordinary means of communication.
The investigators recognized the possibility that in the first of the
above-mentioned two classes of experiments there is a possibility of
suspicion of collusion, fraud, or unconscious suggestion, in the matter of
the motion of the eyes of the party, or some member of it, which might be
seized upon, perhaps unconsciously, by the recipient, and used to guide
him to the object which was being thought of by the projector or the
party. They sought to obviate this difficulty by blindfolding the
percipient, and by placing non-conductors of sound over his ears. But,
finally, they came to the conclusion that even these precautions might not
prove sufficient; and, accordingly, they devoted their attention to the
second class of experiments, in which all ordinary means of communication
between projector and recipient were impossible. They took the additional
precautions of limiting their circle to a small number of investigators of
scientific reputations, and well known to each other, always avoiding a
promiscuous company for obvious reasons.

One of the earliest series of investigations by these special committees
of investigators was that of the family of the Rev. A.M. Creery, in
Derbyshire, England. The children of this family had acquired a reputation
in what was known as the "guessing game," in which one of the children,
previously placed outside of the room, then returned to the room and
attempted to "guess" the name or location of some object agreed upon by
the party during her absence. The results were very interesting, and quite
satisfactory, and have frequently been referred to in works on the subject
written since that time. I think it well to give the results of this
series of experiments in some little detail, for they form a basis for
experiments on the part of those who read these lessons.

Prof. W.F. Barrett, Professor of Physics in the Royal College of Science
for Ireland, conducted the most of the experiments. The report to the
Society says: "We began by selecting the simplest objects in the room;
then chose names of towns, people, dates, cards out of a pack, lines from
different poems, etc., in fact, any thing or series of ideas that those
present could keep in their minds steadily. The children seldom made a
mistake. I have seen seventeen cards chosen by myself named right in
succession without any mistake. We soon found that a great deal depended
on the steadiness with which the ideas were kept before the minds of the
thinkers, and upon the energy with which they willed the ideas to pass. I
may say that this faculty is not by any means confined to the members of
one family; it is much more general than we imagine. To verify this
conclusion, I invited two of a neighbor's children to join us in our
experiments, with excellent results."

The report gives the methods of the experiments, as follows: "The inquiry
has taken place partly in Mr. Creery's house, and partly in lodgings, or
at a hotel occupied by some of our number. Having selected at random one
child, whom we desired to leave the room and wait at some distance, we
would choose a pack of cards, or write on a piece of paper a name of a
number which occurred to us at the moment. Generally, but not always, this
was shown to the members of the family present in the room; but no one
member was always present, and we were sometimes entirely alone. We then
recalled the child, one of us always assuring himself that, when the door
was suddenly opened, she was at a considerable distance, though this was
usually a superfluity of caution, as our habit was to avoid all utterances
of what was chosen. On re-entering, she stood--sometimes turned by us with
her face toward the wall, oftener with her eyes directed toward the
ground, and usually close to us and remote from the family--for a period
of silence varying from a few seconds to a minute, till she called out to
us some number, card, or whatever it might be."

In the first experiments, in "guessing" the name of objects, the child
guessed correctly six out of fourteen. She then guessed correctly the
name of small objects held in the hands of one of the committee--five
times out of six. She guessed fictitious names chosen by the
committee--five out of ten, at the first trial. The committee then tested
her by writing down the name of some object in the house, fixed at random,
and then, after all had thought intently of the thing, they sent for the
child and bade her try to find the thing thought of, the
thought-concentration of course continuing during the search. The result
is thus reported: "In this way I wrote down, among other things, a
hair-brush--it was brought; an orange--it was brought; a wine-glass--it
was brought; an apple--it was brought; and so on, until many objects had
been selected and found by the child."

Passing over the details of many other experiments we find that the
following remarkable results were obtained by the committee: "Altogether,
three hundred and eighty-two trials were made in this series. In the case
of letters of the alphabet, of cards, and of numbers of two figures, the
chances of success on a first trial would naturally be 25 to 1, 52 to 1,
and 89 to 1, respectively; in the case of surnames they would of course be
infinitely greater. Cards were far most frequently employed, and the odds
in their case may be taken as a fair medium sample, according to which,
out of a whole series of three hundred and eighty-two trials, the average
number of successes at the first attempt by an ordinary guesser would be
seven and one-third. Of our trials, one hundred and twenty-seven were
successes on the first attempt, fifty-six on the second, nineteen on the
third--MAKING TWO HUNDRED AND TWO, OUT OF A POSSIBLE THREE HUNDRED AND
EIGHTY-TWO!" Think of this, while the law of averages called for only
seven and one-third successes at first trial, the children obtained one
hundred and twenty-seven, which, given a second and third trial, they
raised to two hundred and two! You see, this takes the matter entirely out
of the possibility of coincidence or mathematical probability.

But this was not all. Listen to the further report of the committee on
this point: "The following was the result of one of the series. The thing
selected was divulged to none of the family, and five cards running were
named correctly on a first trial. The odds against this happening once in
a series were considerably over a million to one. There were other similar
batches, the two longest runs being eight consecutive guesses, once with
cards, and once with names; where the adverse odds in the former case were
over one hundred and forty-two millions to one; and in the other,
something incalculably greater." The opinion of eminent mathematicians who
have examined the above results is that the hypothesis of mere coincidence
is practically excluded in the scientific consideration of the matter. The
committee calls special attention to the fact that in many of the most
important tests none of the Creery family were cognizant of the object
selected, and that, therefore, the hypothesis of fraud or collusion is
absolutely eliminated. The committee naturally came to the conclusion
that the phenomena was genuine and real telepathy.

Prof. Balfour Stewart, LL.D., F.R.S., who was present at some of these
experiments, though not a member of the committee, expressed great
amazement at some of the results. He reports: "The thought-reader was
outside a door. The object or thing thought of was written on paper and
silently handed to the company in the room. The thought reader was then
called in, and in the course of a minute the answer was given. Definite
objects in the room, for instance, were first thought of, and in the
majority of the cases the answers were correct. Then numbers were thought
of, and the answers were generally right, though, of course, there were
some cases of error. The names of towns were thought of, and a good many
of these were right. Then fancy names were thought of. I was asked to
think of certain fancy names, and mark them down and hand them round to
the company. I thought of and wrote on paper, 'Blue-beard,' 'Tom Thumb,'
'Cinderella.' and the answers were all correct!"

The committee also conducted a number of experiments with other
recipients, with very satisfactory results. Colors were correctly guessed
with a percentage of successes quite beyond the average or probable
number. Names of towns in all parts of the world, were correctly "guessed"
by certain recipients with a wonderful degree of success. But, probably
most wonderful of all, was the correct reproduction of diagrams of
geometrical and other figures and shapes. In one case, the recipient, in a
series of nine trials, succeeded in drawing them all correctly, except
that he frequently reversed them, making the upper-side down, and the
right-hand side to the left. The Society, has published these reproduced
diagrams in its Illustrated reports, and they have convinced the most
skeptical of critics. Some of the diagrams were quite complicated,
unusual, and even grotesque, and yet they were reproduced with marvelous
accuracy, not in a hesitating manner, but deliberately and continuously,
as if the recipient were actually copying a drawing in full sight. Similar
results have been obtained by other investigators who have followed the
lead of these original ones.

So you see, the seal of scientific authority has been placed upon the
phenomena of telepathy. It is no longer in the realm of the supernatural
or uncanny. As Camille Flammarion, the eminent French scientist, has said:
"The action of one mind upon another at a distance--the transmission of
thought, mental suggestion, communication at a distance--all these are not
more extraordinary than the action of the magnet on iron, the influence of
the moon on the sea, the transportation of the human voice by electricity,
the revolution of the chemical constituents of a star by the analysis of
its light, or, indeed, all the wonders of contemporary science. Only these
psychic communications are of a more elevated kind, and may serve to put
us on the track of a knowledge of human nature. What is certain is: That
telepathy can and ought to be henceforth considered by Science as an
incontestable reality; that minds are able to act upon each other without
the intervention of the senses; that psychic force exists, though its
nature is yet unknown. * * * We say that this force is of a psychic order,
and not physical, or physiological, or chemical, or mechanical, because it
produces and transmits ideas and thoughts, and because it manifests itself
without the co-operation of our senses, soul to soul, mind to mind."

In addition to investigating the above mentioned classes of telepathic
phenomena, the English Society for Psychical Research investigated many
remarkable cases of a somewhat higher phase of telepathy. They took down
the stories told by persons deemed responsible, and then carefully
examined, and cross-examined other witnesses to the strange phenomena. The
record of these experiments, and investigations, fill a number of good
sized volumes of the Society's reports, which are well worth reading by
all students of the subject. They may be found in the libraries of nearly
any large city. I shall, however, select a number of the most interesting
of the cases therein reported, to give my students an idea of the
character of the phenomena so investigated and found genuine by the
committees having this class of telepathy under investigation.

An interesting case of spontaneous telepathy is that related by Dr. Ede,
as follows: "There is a house about a half-mile from my own, inhabited by
some ladies, friends of our family. They have a large alarm bell outside
their house. One night I awoke suddenly and said to my wife: 'I am sure I
hear Mrs. F's alarm bell ringing.' After listening for some time, we heard
nothing, and I went to sleep again. The next day Mrs. F. called upon my
wife and said to her: 'We were wishing for your husband last night, for we
were alarmed by thieves. We were all up, and I was about to pull the alarm
bell, hoping that he would hear it, saying to my daughters, "I am sure it
will soon bring Dr. Ede," but we did not ring it.' My wife asked what time
this had happened, and Mrs. F. said that it was about half past one. That
was the time I awoke thinking that I heard the bell."

In this case there was manifested simply ordinary physical plane
telepathy. Had the bell actually been rung, and heard psychically, it
would have been a case of astral plane hearing, known as clairaudience. As
it was, merely the thought in the mind of Mrs. F., and her strong idea to
ring the bell, caused a transmission of thought waves which struck Dr. Ede
with great force and awakened him. This case is interesting because it is
typical of many cases of a similar nature within the experience of many
persons. It is seen that a strong feeling, or excitement, accompanied by a
strong desire or wish to summon another person, tends to give great power
and effect to the thought waves emitted. They strike the mind of the
recipient like the sudden ringing of an alarm clock bell.

Another interesting case is that of two ladies, both well known to members
of the committee, and vouched for as of strict veracity. This case is
unusual for the reason that two different persons received the
thought-waves at the same time. Here is an abridgment of the case: "Lady
G. and her sister had been spending the evening with their mother, who was
in her usual health and spirits when they left her. In the middle of the
night the sister awoke in her fright and said to her husband: 'I must go
to my mother at once; do order the carriage. I am sure that she is taken
ill.' On the way to her mother's house, where two roads meet, she saw Lady
G.'s carriage approaching. When they met each asked the other why she was
there. They both related the same experience and impression. When they
reached their mother's house, they found that she was dying, and had
expressed an earnest wish to see them."

Another case of a similar nature is this: "At the siege of Mooltan, Major
General R., then adjutant of his regiment, was severely wounded and
supposed himself to be dying. He requested that his ring be taken off his
finger and sent to his wife. At the same time his wife was at Ferozepore,
one hundred and fifty miles distant, lying on her bed, in a state half way
between waking and sleeping. She saw her husband being taken off the
field, and heard his voice saying: 'Take this ring off my finger, and send
it to my wife.'"

This case bears the marks of very strong telepathy, but also has a
suspicious resemblance to clairvoyance accompanied by clairaudience. Or
perhaps it is a combination of both telepathy and clairvoyance. It is
impossible to determine which, in absence of more detailed information.
The message of persons dying, or believing themselves to be approaching
death, are frequently very strong, for certain reasons well known to
occultists. But there is nothing supernatural about the phenomena, and in
most cases it is merely a case of strong telepathy.

The Society also reports the following interesting case: "A. was awake,
and strongly willed to make himself known to two friends who at that time
(one o'clock in the morning) were asleep. When he met them a few days
afterward, they both told him that at one o'clock they had awakened under
the impression that he was in their room. The experience was so vivid that
they could not go to sleep for some time, and looked at their watches to
note the time." Cases of this kind are quite common, and many
experimenters have had equally good results with this phase of thought
transference. You will remember that there is no actual projection of the
astral body, in most of these cases, but merely a strong impression caused
by concentrated thought.

Another interesting case is that of the late Bishop Wilberforce, and is
recorded in his biography, as follows: The Bishop was in his library at
Cuddleson, with three or four of his clergy with him at the same table.
The Bishop suddenly raised his hand to his head, and exclaimed: "I am
certain that something has happened to one of my sons." It afterwards
transpired that just at that time his eldest son's foot was badly crushed
by an accident on board his ship, the son being at sea. The Bishop himself
recorded the circumstance in a letter to Miss Noel, saying: "It is curious
that at the time of his accident I was so possessed with the depressing
consciousness of some evil having befallen my son, Herbert, that at the
last, I wrote down that I was unable to shake off the impression that
something had happened to him, and noted this down for remembrance." There
is nothing unusual about this case, for it has been duplicated in the
experience of many persons. Its chief importance lies in the fact that it
is recorded by a man of wide reputation and high standing, and also that
the Bishop had taken the precaution to note down the thing at the time,
instead of merely recalling it after he had heard of the accident.

You will notice that in many cases of this kind the phenomenon closely
approaches the aspect of true clairvoyance, or astral sensing. In some
cases there appears to be a blending of both telepathy and astral
clairvoyance. In fact, there is but very little difference between the
highest phases of ordinary telepathy, and the more common phases of
clairvoyance. Here, as in many other cases of Nature's forces, there seems
to be a gradual blending, rather than a sharp dividing line between the
two classes of phenomena. Moreover, the student developing his telepathic
powers will frequently find that he is beginning to unfold at least
occasional flashes of clairvoyance.

In the case of telepathy, the recipient merely senses what is in the mind
of the projector. In some cases a picture in the mind of the projector may
be seen by the recipient, and may thus be mistaken for a case of pure
clairvoyance. But, in investigating closely, it will be found that the
real scene was slightly different from the impression, in which case it
shows that the impression was simply telepathic. Clairvoyant vision shows
the scene as it really is, or rather as the physical eye of the recipient
would have seen it. The astral sight really sees the scene, and does not
merely receive the mental impression of the projector. The first is
original seeing; the second, merely a reproduction of images already in
the mind of the projector, and colored by his personality, etc.

In the next lesson, I shall give you a number of exercises and methods
designed to develop your telepathic powers. You will find the practice of
these most interesting and entertaining, and at the same time most
instructive. You will find that as you practice the exercises given
therein, you will become more and more adept and proficient in producing
telepathic phenomena. From the lower stages, you will be able to proceed
to the higher. And, in time, you will be surprised to find that almost
unconsciously you have passed into the stage in which you will have at
least occasional manifestations of clairvoyance, psychometry, etc.

In fact, there is no better way known to practical occultists to develop
in a student the powers of clairvoyance than just this method of starting
the student with the exercises designed to develop the telepathic power.
It has been found by centuries of experience that the student who develops
telepathic power, in a systematic way, will gradually unfold and evolve
the clairvoyant and psychometric power. It constitutes the first rungs on
the ladder of psychic development.

Of course, under the head of clairvoyance, etc., you will be given methods
and exercise designed to develop clairvoyant powers--some of them very
valuable and effective methods, at that. But, notwithstanding this, I feel
that I should impress upon you the importance of laying a firm foundation
for such instruction, by developing yourself first along the lines of
telepathic power. Such a course will not only keenly sharpen your powers
of receptivity to such vibrations as you may wish to receive; but it will
also train your mind in the direction of translating, interpreting, and
recording such impressions when received.

You must remember that proficiency in a mental art is attained only by
means of training the attention to concentrate upon the task. It is the
same way in clairvoyance and psychometry. Telepathy trains your attention
to concentrate upon the reception of impressions, and to hold them firmly
and clearly in consciousness. The result is that when you really develop
clairvoyant receptivity, your attention has already been trained to do
the necessary work. I need not tell you what an advantage this gives you
over the clairvoyant who has not received this training, for your own good
common sense will assure you of it.

So, now for our training in telepathy--not only for itself, but also as a
means of preparing for the higher stages.




LESSON V.

MIND READING, AND BEYOND.


The simpler forms of telepathic phenomena have received the name "Mind
Reading" and by some have been regarded as something not quite within the
class of real telepathy. This last impression has been heightened by the
fact that there has been offered the public many spectacular exhibitions
of pseudo mind-reading, that is to say, imitation or counterfeit
mind-reading, in which the result has been obtained by trickery,
collusion, or clever artifice. But, notwithstanding this fact, genuine
mind-reading is actually a phase of true telepathy.

What is generally known as mind-reading may be divided into two classes,
as follows: (1) where there is an actual physical contact between the
projector and the receiver; and (2) where there is no actual physical
contact, but where there is a close relation in space between the two
parties, as in the case of the "willing game." In the first class belong
all cases in which the projector touches the recipient, or at least is
connected with him by a material object. In the second class belong those
cases in which the recipient seeks to find an object which is being
thought of by either a single projector, or by a number of persons in the
same room. You will notice that both of these classes were omitted from
the experiments of the Society for Psychical Research, because of the
possibility of fraud or collusion. But, nevertheless, the student will do
well to acquire proficiency in manifesting this form of telepathy, not
alone for its own sake, but, also, because it naturally leads to higher
development.

In the case of the first class of mind-reading namely, that in which
actual physical contact is had between the projector and the recipient,
there has been a disposition on the part of some authorities to explain
the whole matter by the theory of unconscious muscular impulse of the
projector; but those who have carefully studied this subject, and who have
themselves performed the feats of this class of mind-reading, know that
there is far more than this to it. Those familiar with the subject know
that there is a decided transference of thought-waves from the projector
to the recipient, and that the latter actually "feels" the same as they
strike upon his mental receiving apparatus. The whole difference between
this and the higher forms of telepathy is that in this the
thought-currents generally run along the wires of the nervous system,
instead of leaping across the space between the two persons.

It is known to all who have conducted this class of experiments, that at
times there will be experienced a change or shifting in the transmission
of the thought-currents. For a time, the thought-waves will be felt
flowing in along the nerves of the hands and arms when, all of a sudden
this will cease, and there will be experienced the passage of the current
direct from brain to brain. It is impossible to describe this feeling in
mere words, to those who have never experienced it. But those to whom it
has once been manifested will recognize at once just what I mean by this
statement. It is a different sensation from any other in the experience of
a human being, and must actually be experienced to be understood. The
nearest analogy I can offer is that feeling experienced by the person when
a forgotten name for which he has vainly sought, suddenly flashes or leaps
into his consciousness--it is felt to come from somewhere outside of the
conscious field. Well, in the case of the thought-current the feeling is
much the same, only there is a fuller sense of the "outsideness" of the
source of the thought.

In order to make you understand the distinction between the two classes of
mind-reading more clearly, I will say that you may think of one as akin to
the ordinary telegraphy over wires; and of the other as akin to wireless
telegraphy. It is the same force in both cases, the difference being
simply one of the details of transmission. Fix this idea firmly in your
mind, and you will have no trouble in always having the right conception
of any kind of case of mind-reading, or telepathy. But, you must remember,
there are cases in which there is a combination of both methods of
transmission, either simultaneously, or else shifting and changing from
one to the other.

I will here remind the student that he will learn more by a half-dozen
actual experiments in mind-reading, than he will by reading a dozen books
on the subject. It is very good to read the books in order to get the
correct theory well fixed in mind, and also in order to learn the best
methods as taught by those who have had a wide experience in the subject;
but the real "how" of the matter is learned only through actual
experience. So, I shall now give you advice and instructions concerning
actual experimental work.

You, the student, should begin by making yourself a good recipient--that
is a good "mind reader," allowing others to play the part of projector.
Later on, you may play the part of projector, if you so desire, but the
real "fine work" is done by the recipient, and, for that reason that is
the part you should learn to play by frequent rehearsals.

I advise you to begin your experiments with friends who are in sympathy
with you, and who are interested in the subject. Avoid particularly all
early experiments with uncongenial or unsympathetic persons; and avoid as
you would a pestilence all those who are antagonistic either to yourself
or to the general subject of telepathy and kindred subjects. As you must
make yourself especially "sensitive" in order to successfully conduct a
mind-reading test, you will find yourself particularly susceptible to the
mental attitude of those around you at such times, and therefore should
surround yourself only with those who are congenial and sympathetic.

You will find that there is a great difference between the several persons
whom you "try out" as projectors. Some will be more "en rapport" with you
than are others who may be equally good friends. "En rapport," you know,
means "in vibrational harmony." When two persons are en rapport with each
other, they are like two wireless telegraphic instruments perfectly
attuned to each other. In such cases there are obtained the very best
results. You will soon learn to distinguish the degree of en rapport
conditions between yourself and different persons--you soon learn to
"feel" this condition. In the beginning, it will be well for you to try
several persons, one after the other, in your mind-reading experiments, in
order to pick out the best one, and also to learn the "feel" of the
different degrees of en rapport condition.

Even in cases of persons in whom the en rapport conditions are good, it is
well to establish a rhythmic unison between you. This is done by both you
and the person breathing in rhythmic unison a few moments. Begin by
counting "one-two-three-four," like the slow ticking of a large clock.
Have the other person join with you in so counting, until your minds both
work in the same rhythmic time. Then you should have him breathe in unison
with you, making a mental count with you at the same time, so that you
will "breathe together." Count (mentally) "one-two-three-four," as you
inhale; the "one-two," holding the breath; and, then "one-two-three-four,"
exhaling or breathing-out. Try this several times, and, you will find that
you have established a rhythmic unison between yourself and the other
person. In the progress of an experiment, if you should find that the
conditions are not as good as might be desired, you will do well to pause
for a few moments and re-establish the proper rhythmic harmony by this
method of harmonious rhythmic breathing.

Begin by having the projector select some prominent object in the room, a
chair, or table for instance. Then have him take your left hand in his
right hand. Raise your left hand, held in his right hand, to your
forehead; then close your eyes and remain passive a few moments. Have him
concentrate his mind intently on the selected object--and will that you
should move toward it. Have him think of nothing else except that object,
and to will you to move toward it, with all his power. Close your eyes,
and quiet your mind, opening your consciousness to every mental impression
that he may send you. Instruct him to think not merely "chair," for
instance, but rather "there--go there." The main thought in his mind must
be that of direction. He must will that you move toward that chair.

After a moment or two, you will begin to feel a vague, general impulse to
move your feet. Obey the impulse. Take a few slow steps in any direction
that seems easy to you. Sometimes this will take you in an opposite
direction from that of the chair, but it will "get you going," and you
will soon begin to feel that the direction is "all wrong," and will begin
to be mentally pulled in the right direction. You will have to actually
experience this feeling, before you will fully understand just what I
mean.

After some little practice, you will begin to feel quite distinctly the
mental direction, or will-force, of the projector, which will seem to tell
you to "come this way--now stop--now turn a little to the right--now a
little to the left--now stop where you are, and put out your right
hand--lower your hand--move your hand a little to the right--that's it,
now you have got it all right." You will soon learn to distinguish between
the "no, that's wrong" thought, and the "that's right" one; and between
the "go on," and the "come on" one. By making yourself completely passive,
and receptive and obedient to the thought and will-impulses of the
projector, you will soon act like a ship under the influence of the rudder
in the hand of the projector.

After you have attained proficiency in receiving the mental impressions
and directions, you will find yourself attracted or drawn, like a piece of
steel to the magnet, toward the object selected. It will sometimes seem as
if you were being moved to it even against your own will--and as if
someone else were actually moving your feet for you. Sometimes the impulse
will come so strong that you will actually rush ahead of the projector,
dragging him along with you, instead of having him a little in advance, or
by your side. It is all a matter of practice.

You will soon discover the great difference between different projectors.
Some of them will be in perfect en rapport condition with you, while
others will fail to get into tune with you. Some projectors do not seem
to know what is required of them, and usually forget to "will" you to the
object. It helps sometimes to tell them that the whole thing depends upon
their will power, and that the stronger their will is, the easier it is
for you to find the thing. This puts them on their mettle, and makes them
use their will more vigorously.

You will soon learn to recognize that peculiar feeling of "all right,"
that comes when you finally stand in front of the desired object. Then you
begin to move your right hand up and down and around, until you get the
right "feel" about that also, when you should place your hand on the place
which seems to attract you most. You will find that the hand is just as
responsive to the mental force, as are the feet. You will soon learn to
distinguish between the mental signals: "up," "down," "to the right," "to
the left," "stop now, you're right," etc. I cannot tell you just the
difference--you must learn to "feel" them, and you will soon become expert
in this. It is like learning to skate, run an automobile, operate a
typewriter or anything else--all a matter of exercise and practice. But it
is astonishing how rapidly one may learn; and how, at times, one seems to
progress by great leaps and bounds. Now I shall give you the different
stages or steps, which you will do well to follow in your exercises,
progressing from the more simple to the more complex--but be sure to
thoroughly master the simple ones, before you pass on to the more complex
one. Be honest and strict with yourself--make yourself "pass the
examination" before promotion, in each and every step.

1. LOCATIONS. Begin by finding particular locations in a room;
corners, alcoves, doors, etc.

2. LARGE OBJECTS. Then begin to find large objects, such as tables,
chairs, book-cases, etc.

3. SMALL OBJECTS. Then proceed to find small objects, such as books
on a table, sofa-cushions, ornaments, paper-knives, etc. Gradually work
down to very small objects, such as scarf-pins, articles of jewelry,
pocket-knives, etc.

4. CONCEALED OBJECTS. Then proceed to find small objects that have
been concealed under other objects, such as a pocket-book beneath a
sofa-cushion, etc.; or a key in a book; or a key under a rug, etc.

5. MINUTE OBJECTS. Then proceed to discover very small objects,
either concealed or else placed in an inconspicuous place, such as a pin
stuck in the wall, etc.; or a small bean under a vase, etc.

The public performers of mind reading vary the above by sensational
combinations, but you will readily see that these are but ingenious
arrangements of the above general experiments, and that no new principle
is involved. As these lessons are designed for serious study and
experiment, and not for sensational public performances, I shall not enter
into this phase of the subject in these pages. The student who understands
the general principles, and is able to perform the above experiments
successfully, will have no difficulty in reproducing the genuine feats of
the public mind readers, by simply using his ingenuity in arranging the
stage-effects, etc. Among other things, he will find that he will be able
to obtain results by interposing a third person between the projector and
himself; or by using a short piece of wire to connect himself and the
projector. Drawing pictures on a blackboard, or writing out names on a
slate, by means of thought direction, are simply the result of a fine
development of the power of finding the small article--the impulse to move
the hand in a certain direction comes in precisely the same way. The
public driving feats of the professional mind-reader are but a more
complicated form of the same general principle--the impression of
"direction" once obtained, the rest is a mere matter of detail. The
opening of the combination of a safe, though requiring wonderful
proficiency on the part of the operator, is simply an elaboration of the
"direction" movement.

Some recipients are, of course, far more proficient than are others; but
each and every person--any person of average intelligence--will be able to
secure more or less proficiency in these experiments, provided that
patience and practice are employed. There is no such thing as an absolute
failure possible to anyone who will proceed intelligently, and will
practice sufficiently. Sometimes, after many discouraging attempts, the
whole thing will flash into one's mind at once, and after that there will
be little or no trouble. If you are able to witness the demonstrations of
some good mind-reader, professional or amateurs it will help you to
"catch the knack" at once.

You will find that these experiments will tend to greatly and rapidly
develop your psychic receptivity in the direction of the higher phases of
psychic phenomena. You will be surprised to find yourself catching flashes
or glimpses of ^higher telepathy, or even clairvoyance. I would advise
every person wishing to cultivate the higher psychic faculties, to begin
by perfecting himself or herself in these simpler forms of mind-reading.
Besides the benefits obtained, the practice proves very interesting, and
opens many doors to pleasant social entertainment. But, never allow the
desire for social praise or popularity, in these matters, to spoil you for
serious investigation and experiment.

THE SECOND STEP OF DEVELOPMENT. The student, having perfected himself
in the experiments along the lines of the first class of mind-reading,
viz., where there is no actual physical contact between the projector and
recipient, but where there is a close relation in space between the two.

Now, the thoughtful student will naturally wish to ask a question here,
something like this: "You have told us that there is no real difference
between telepathy at a great distance, and that in which there is only the
slightest difference in the position of the projector and recipient,
providing, always, that there is no actual physical contact. This being
so, why your insistence upon the 'close relation in space' just
mentioned?--what is the reason for this nearness?" Well, it is like this:
While there is no distinction of space in true telepathy, still in
experiments such as I shall now describe, the physical nearness of the
projector enables him to concentrate more forcibly, and also gives
confidence to the new beginner in receiving mind-currents. The benefit is
solely that of the psychological effect upon the minds of the two persons,
and has nothing to do with the actual power of the telepathic waves. It is
much easier for a person to concentrate his thought and will upon a person
in actual physical sight before him, than upon one out of sight. And,
likewise, the recipient finds himself more confident and at ease when in
the actual physical of the person sending the thoughts and will power.
That is all there is to it. When the persons have acquired familiarity
with projecting and receiving, then this obstacle is overcome, and long
distances have no terror for them.

The best way for the student to start in on this class of mind-reading, is
for him to experiment occasionally while performing his physical contact
mind-reading experiments. For instance, while engaged in searching for an
object let him disengage his hand from that of the projector for a moment
or so, and then endeavor to receive the impressions without contact. (This
should be done only in private experiments, not in public ones.) He will
soon discover that he is receiving thought impulses in spite of the lack
of physical contact--faint, perhaps, but still perceptible. A little
practice of this kind will soon convince him that he is receiving the
mental currents direct from brain to brain. This effect will be increased
if he arranges to have several persons concentrate their thoughts and will
power upon him during the experiment. From this stage, he will gradually
develop into the stage of the Willing Game.

The Willing Game, quite popular in some circles, is played by one person
(usually blind-folded) being brought into the room in which a number of
persons have previously agreed upon some object to be found by him, they
concentrating their thought firmly upon the object. The audience should be
taught to not only to think but also to actively "will" the progress of
the recipient from the start to the finish of the hunt. They should "will"
him along each step of his journey, and then "will" his hand to the object
itself wherever it be hidden.

An adept in the receiving end of the Willing Game will be able to perform
all the experiments that I have just pointed out to you in the contact
mind-reading class. In the Willing Game, you must remember that there is
no taking hold of hands or any other form of physical contact between
projector and recipient. The transmission of the mental currents must be
direct, from brain to brain. Otherwise, the two classes of experiments are
almost identical. There is the same "willing" toward the object on the
part of the projectors, and the same passive obedience of the recipient.
All the difference is that the current now passes over the ether of
space, as in the case of the wireless message, instead of over the wires
of the nervous system of the two persons.

The next step is that of "guessing" the name of things thought of by the
party. I can give you no better directions than those followed by the
investigators in the Creery children, as related in a preceding chapter of
this book. When you become sufficiently proficient in this class of
mind-reading, you should be able to reproduce every experiment there
mentioned, with at least a fair degree of success. It is all a matter of
patience, perseverance and practice.

After you have become very proficient in this class of experiments, you
may begin to try experiments at "long distance," that is where the
projector is out of your physical presence. It makes no difference whether
the distance be merely that between two adjoining rooms, or else of miles
of space. At first, however, nearness adds confidence in the majority of
cases. Confidence once gained, the distance may be lengthened
indefinitely, without impairing the success of the experiments. The long
distance experiments may consist either of the receiving of single words,
names, etc., or else distinct, clear messages or ideas. Some find it no
more difficult to reproduce simile geometrical designs, such as circles,
squares, triangles, etc., than to reproduce words or ideas.

In long distance experiments, it is well for the projector to write down
the word or thought he wishes to transmit, and for the recipient to write
down the impressions he receives. These memoranda will serve as a record
of progress, and will, moreover, give a scientific value to the
experiments.

Some experimenters have been quite successful in experiments along the
lines of Automatic Writing from living persons, produced by means of long
distance telepathy. In these cases the recipient sits passively at the
hour agreed upon for the experiment, and the projector concentrates
intently upon a sentence, or several sentences, one word at a time--at the
same time "willing" the other person to write the word. The famous
investigator of psychic phenomena, the late W.T. Stead, editor of a London
newspaper, who went down on the "Titanic," was very successful in
experiments of this kind. His written records of these are very
interesting and instructive.

You will, of course, understand that in all cases of long distance
telepathic experiments there should be an understanding between the two
persons regarding the time and duration of the experiment, so as to obtain
the best results. Personally, however, I have known of some very excellent
results in which the receiving of the message occurred several hours after
the sending--thus showing that telepathy is in a measure independent of
time, as well as of space. But, as a rule, the best results are obtained
when the two persons "sit" simultaneously.

Do not rest content with accepting the reports of others regarding these
things. Try them for yourself. You will open up a wonderful world of new
experiences for yourself. But, remember always, you must proceed step by
step, perfecting yourself at each step before proceeding to the next.




LESSON VI.

CLAIRVOYANT PSYCHOMETRY.


The word "clairvoyance" means "clear seeing." In its present usage it
covers a wide field of psychic phenomena; and is used by different writers
to designate phases of psychic phenomena differing widely from each other.
The student is apt to become confused when he meets these apparently
conflicting definitions and usages. In the glossary of the Society for
Psychical Research, the term is defined as: "The faculty or act of
perceiving, as though visually, with some coincidental truth, some distant
scene; it is used sometimes, but hardly properly, for transcendental
vision, or the perception of beings regarded as on another plane of
existence."

Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, a distinguished writer on the subject of psychic
phenomena, in one of her reports to the Society for Psychical Research,
says: "The word clairvoyant is often used very loosely and with widely
different meanings. I denote by it a faculty of acquiring supernormally,
but not by reading the minds of persons present, a knowledge of facts such
as we normally acquire by the use of our senses. I do not limit it to
knowledge that would normally be acquired by the sense of sight, nor do I
limit it to a knowledge of present facts. A similar knowledge of the past,
and if necessary, of future facts may be included. On the other hand, I
exclude the mere faculty of seeing apparitions or visions, which is
sometimes called clairvoyance."

The above definitive explanation of the term clairvoyance agrees with the
idea of the best authorities, and distinguishes between the phenomena of
clairvoyance and that of telepathy, on the one hand; and between the
former and that of seeing apparitions, on the other hand. I, personally,
accept this distinction as both scientific in form, and as agreeing with
the facts of the case. You will, of course, see that the acceptance of the
existence of the astral senses throws light on many obscure points about
which the psychic researchers are in doubt, and reconciles many apparently
opposing facts.

All scientific authorities, as well as the best occultists, divide the
phenomena of clairvoyance into several well-distinguished classes. The
following classification is simple, and indicates clearly the principal
forms of clairvoyant phenomena:

(1) Simple Clairvoyance, in which the clairvoyant person merely senses the
auric emanations of other persons, such as the auric vibrations, colors,
etc.; currents of thought-vibrations, etc.; but does not see events or
scenes removed in space or time from the observer.

(2) Clairvoyance in Space, in which the clairvoyant person senses scenes
and events removed in space from the observer; and, often also is able to
sense such things even when they are concealed or obscured by intervening
material objects.

(3) Clairvoyance in Time, in which the clairvoyant person senses scenes
and events which have had their original place in past time; or scenes
and events which will have their original place in the future.

I shall describe each of these three classes, with their many variations,
as we reach them in their proper places in these lessons. Before doing so
however, I wish to explain to you the several methods by which clairvoyant
vision is usually induced. These methods may be designated as follows:

(1) Psychometry, or the method of getting en rapport with the astral plane
by means of some physical object connected with the person, thing, or
scene about which you desire to be informed.

(2) Crystal Gazing, etc., or the method of getting en rapport with the
astral plane by means of gazing into a crystal, magic mirror, etc.

(3) Clairvoyant Reverie, or the method of getting en rapport with the
astral plane by means of psychic states in which the sights, sounds and
thoughts of the material and physical plane are shut out of consciousness.

I shall now proceed to give the details regarding each one of these three
great classes of methods inducing clairvoyant vision, or en rapport
conditions with the astral plane.

Psychometry. Psychometry is that form of clairvoyant phenomena in which
the clairvoyant gets into en rapport relation with the astral plane by
means of the connecting link of material objects, such as bit of stone,
piece of hair, article of wearing apparel etc., which has had previous
associations with the thing, person or scene regarding which clairvoyant
vision is required.

Without going into technical occult explanations, I would say that the
virtue of these articles consists entirely of their associative value.
That is to say, they carry in them certain vibrations of past experience
which serve as a connecting link, or associated filament, with the thing
which is sought to be brought into the field of clairvoyant vision.

To reach clairvoyantly a thing, scene, or person in this way is akin to
the unwinding of a ball of yarn, when you hold the loose end in your hand.
Or, it is like giving a keen-scented dog a sniff at a handkerchief once
carried by the person whom you wish him to nose out for you.

A well-known authority on the subject of psychic phenomena has said on
this point: "The untrained clairvoyant usually cannot find any particular
astral picture when it is wanted, without some special link to put him en
rapport with the subject required. Psychometry is an instance in point. It
seems as though there were a sort of magnetic attachment or affinity
between any particle of matter and the record which contains its
history--an affinity which enables it to act as a kind of conductor
between that record and the faculties of anyone who can read it. For
instance, I once brought from Stonehenge a tiny fragment of stone, not
larger than a pin's head, and on putting this into an envelope and handing
it to a psychometer who had no idea what it was, she at once began to
describe that wonderful ruin and the desolate country surrounding it, and
then went on to picture vividly what were evidently scenes from its early
history, showing that the infinitessimal fragment had been sufficient to
put her into communication with the records connected with the spot from
which it came. The scenes through which we pass in the course of our life
seem to act in the same way upon the cells of our brain as did the history
of Stonehenge upon that particle of stone. They establish a connection
with those cells by means of which our mind is put en rapport with that
particular portion of the records, and so we 'remember' what we have
seen."

One of the simplest and most common form of psychometry is that in which
the psychometrist is able to tell the physical condition of a person by
means of holding to the forehead, or even in the hand, some trinket or
small article such as a handkerchief recently worn on the person of the
individual regarding whom the information is sought. In the case of some
very sensitive psychometrists, the psychic person "takes on" the condition
of the other person whose former article of clothing, trinket, etc., she
is holding. She will often actually experience the physical pain and
distress of the person, and will be able to indicate from what ailment the
person is suffering. Some persons attain great proficiency in this
direction, and are a great assistance to wise physicians who avail
themselves of their services. Some successful physicians themselves
possess this faculty well developed, and use it to great advantage,
though, as a rule they keep very quiet about it, from fear of creating
unfavorable comment from their fellow-physicians and from the general
public who "do not believe in such tom-foolery."

A step further is the power of some psychometrists to correctly describe
the personal characteristics, and even the past history of persons with
whom they come in contact, or whose "associated article" they have in
their hands. Some very remarkable instances of this phase of psychometry
are related in the books containing the history of clairvoyance. An
interesting case is that related by Zschokke, the eminent German writer,
who relates in his autobiography his wonderful experience in this
direction. Listen to the story in his own words: "It has happened to me
occasionally at the first meeting with a total stranger, when I have been
listening in silence to his conversation, that his past life up to the
present moment, with many minute circumstances belonging to one or other
particular scene in it, has come across me like a dream, but distinctly,
entirely involuntarily and unsought, occupying in duration a few minutes.
For a long time I was disposed to consider these fleeting visions as a
trick of the fancy--the more so as my dream-vision displayed to me the
dress and movements of the actors, the appearance of the room, the
furniture, and other accidents of the scene; till on one occasion, in a
gamesome mood, I narrated to my family the secret history of a seamstress
who had just quitted the room. I had never seen the person before.
Nevertheless, the hearers were astonished, and laughed and would not be
persuaded but that I had a previous acquaintance with the former life of
the person, inasmuch as what I had stated was perfectly true.

"I was not less astonished to find that my dream vision agreed with
reality. I then gave more attention to the subject, and as often as
propriety allowed of it, I related to those whose lives had so passed
before me the substance of my dream-vision, to obtain from them its
contradiction or confirmation. On every occasion its confirmation
followed, not without amazement on the part of those who gave it. On a
certain fair-day I went into the town of Waldshut accompanied by two young
foresters, who are still alive. It was evening, and, tired with our walk,
we went into an inn called the 'Vine.' We took our supper with a numerous
company at the public table, when it happened that they made themselves
merry over the peculiarities of the Swiss in connection with the belief in
mesmerism, Lavater's physiognomical system, and the like. One of my
companions, whose national pride was touched by their raillery, begged me
to make some reply, particularly in answer to a young man of superior
appearance who sat opposite, and had indulged in unrestrained ridicule.

"It happened that the events of this person's life had just previously
passed before my mind. I turned to him with the question whether he would
reply to me with truth and candor, if I narrated to him the most secret
passages of his history, he being as little known to me as I to him. That
would, I suggested, go something beyond Lavater's physiognomical skill. He
promised that if I told the truth he would admit it openly. Then I
narrated the events with which my dream vision had furnished me, and the
table learned the history of the young tradesman's life, of his school
years, his peccadilloes, and finally, of a little act of roguery committed
by him on the strongbox of his employer. I described the uninhabited room
with its white walls, where to the right of the brown door there had stood
upon the table the small money-chest, etc. The man, much struck, admitted
the correctness of each circumstance--even, which I could not expect, of
the last."

The above incident is typical of this class of psychometry, and many
persons have had at least flashes of this phase of the power. The only
remarkable thing about this particular case is its faithfulness regarding
details--this shows a very fine development of the astral sense. The
feature that makes it psychometric, instead of pure clairvoyance, is that
the presence of the other person was necessary to produce the
phenomenon--a bit of clothing would probably have answered as well.
Zschokke does not seem to have been able to manifest time-clairvoyance
independent of the presence of the person concerned--he needs the
associated link, or loose end of the psychic ball of yarn.

Next in order in the list of the phenomena of psychometry is that in which
the psychometrist is able to describe a distant scene by means of a bit
of mineral, plant, or similar object, once located at that place. In such
cases, the psychometrist gets en rapport with the distant scene by means
of the connecting link mentioned. Having obtained this, he is able to
relate the events that are happening on that scene at that particular
moment. Some very interesting cases are mentioned in which the
psychometrist has been able to "spy" in on a certain place, by means of
some small article which has recently been located in that place. For
instance I once gave a young psychometrist a penholder from the office of
a lawyer, a friend of mine, located about eight hundred miles from the
psychometrist. She gave a perfect picture of the interior of the office,
the scene across the street visible from the office window, and certain
events that were happening in the office at that moment, which were
verified by careful inquiry as to persons and time. Every occultist, or
investigator of psychic phenomena has experienced many cases of this kind.

Another phase of psychometry is that in which the psychometer is able to
sense the conditions existing underground, by means of a piece of mineral
or metal which originally was located there. Some wonderful instances of
phychometric discernment of mines, etc., have been recorded. In this phase
of psychometry, all that is needed is a piece of the coal, mineral or
metal which has come from the mine. Following up this psychic "lead" the
psychometrist is able to describe the veins or strata of the surrounding
land, although they have not yet been uncovered or discovered.

Still another form of psychometric discernment is that in which the
psychometrist gets en rapport with the past history of an object, or of
its surroundings, by means of the object itself. In this way, the
psychometrist holding in his hand, or pressing to his head, a bullet from
a battle field, is able to picture the battle itself. Or, given a piece of
ancient pottery or stone implement, the psychometrist is able to picture
the time and peoples connected with the object in the past--sometimes
after many centuries are past. I once handed a good psychometrist a bit of
ornament taken from an Egyptian mummy over three thousand years old.
Though the psychometrist did not know what the object was, or from whence
it had come, she was able to picture not only the scenes in which the
Egyptian had lived, but also the scenes connected with the manufacture of
the ornament, some three hundred years before that time--for it turned out
that the ornament itself was an antique when the Egyptian had acquired it.
In another case, I had the psychometrist describe in detail the animal
life, and the physical phenomena, of the age in which a fossil had existed
when alive--many thousands of years ago. In the proper place in this book,
I will explain just how it is possible to penetrate the secrets of the
past by psychometric vision--that is to say, the psychic laws making the
same possible.

Some of the most remarkable of recorded instances of this form of
psychometry known to the Western world are those related in the works of a
geologist named Denton, who some fifty years ago conducted a series of
investigations into the phenomena of psychometry. His recorded experiments
fill several volumes. Being a geologist, he was able to select the best
subjects for the experiments, and also to verify and decide upon the
accuracy of the reports given by the psychometrists. His wife, herself,
was a gifted psychometrist, and it has been said of her, by good
authority, that "she is able, by putting a piece of matter (whatever be
its nature) to her head, to see, either with her eyes closed or open, all
that the piece of matter, figuratively speaking, ever saw, heard, or
experienced." The following examples will give a good idea of the Denton
experiments, which are typical of this class of psychometry.

Dr. Denton gave the psychometrist a small fragment broken from a large
meteorite. She held it to her head, and reported: "This is curious. There
is nothing at all to be seen. I feel as if I were in the air. No, not in
the air either, but in nothing, no place. I am utterly unable to describe
it; it seems high, however I feel as though I were rising, and my eyes are
carried upwards; but I look around in vain; there is nothing to be seen. I
see clouds, now, but nothing else. They are so close to me that I seem to
be in them. My head, and neck and eyes are affected. My eyes are carried
up, and I cannot roll them down. Now the clouds appear lighter and
lighter, and look as though the sunlight would burst through them. As the
clouds separate, I can see a star or two, and then the moon instead of the
sun. The moon seems near, and looks coarse and rough, and paler and larger
in size than I ever saw it before. What a strange feeling comes over me!
It appears as if I were going right to the moon, and it looks as if the
moon were coming to me. It affects me terribly."

Dr. Denton adds: "She was too much affected to continue the experiment
longer. Had this aerolite at some period of its history, come within the
sphere of the moon's attraction, and had its velocity so increased that
its augmented centrifugal force had carried it off into space again,
whence, drawn by the superior attractive force of the earth, it had fallen
and ended its career forever?"

At another time, Dr. Denton tested the psychometrist with a whalebone
walking cane. She supposed it to be wood, but when she began to report her
psychic impressions, they came as follows: "I feel as though I were a
monster. There is nothing of a tree about it, and it is useless for me to
go further. I feel like vomiting. Now I want to plunge into the water. I
believe that I am going to have a fit. My jaws are large enough to take
down a house at a gulp. I now know what this is--it is whalebone. I see
the inside of the whale's mouth. It has no teeth. It has a slimy look, but
I only get a glimpse of it. Now, I see the whole animal. What an awful
looking creature."

Another time, Dr. Denton gave the psychometrist a minute piece of the
enamel of the tooth of a mastodon, which had been found thirty feet below
the surface of the earth. The psychometrist had not the slightest
knowledge of the character of the tiny flake of enamel handed her, but
nevertheless reported: "My impression is that it is a part of some
monstrous animal, probably part of a tooth. I feel like a perfect monster,
with heavy legs, unwieldy head, and very large body. I go down to a
shallow stream to drink. I can hardly speak, my jaws are so heavy. I feel
like getting down on all fours. What a noise comes through the woods. I
have an impulse to answer it. My ears are very large and leathery, and I
can almost fancy they flap in my face as I move my head. There are some
older ones than I. It seems so out of keeping to be talking with these
heavy jaws. They are dark brown, as if they had been completely tanned.
There is one old fellow, with large tusks, that looks very tough. I see
several younger ones. In fact, there is a whole herd. My upper lip moves
curiously; I can flap it up. It seems strange to me how it is done. There
is a plant growing here, higher than my head. It is nearly as thick as my
wrist, very juicy, sweet, and tender--something like green corn in taste,
but sweeter. It is not the taste it would have to a human being--oh no! it
is sickenish, and very unpleasant to the human taste." These instances
might be multiplied indefinitely, but the principle is the same in each.
In my own experience, I gave a small piece from the Great Pyramid of Egypt
to a psychometrist who was uneducated and who knew nothing of ancient
Egypt or its history. Notwithstanding this, she gave me such a detailed
and complete account of the life of ancient Egypt, which was in such
complete accordance with the opinions of the best authorities, that I
would hesitate about publishing the report, for it certainly would be
regarded as rank imposture by the average scientific authority. Some day,
however, I may publish this.

There are no special directions to be given the student in psychometry.
All that can be done is to suggest that each person should try the
experiments for himself, in order to find out whether he has, or has not,
the psychometric faculty. It may be developed by the methods that will be
given to develop all psychic powers, in another part of this book. But
much will depend upon actual practice and exercise. Take strange objects,
and, sitting in a quiet room with the object held to your forehead, shut
out all thoughts of the outside world, and forget all personal affairs. In
a short time, if the conditions are all right, you will begin to have
flashes of scenes connected with the history of the object. At first
rather disconnected and more or less confused, there will soon come to you
a clearing away of the scene, and the pictures will become quite plain.
Practice will develop the power. Practice only when alone, or when in the
presence of some sympathetic friend or friends. Always avoid discordant
and inharmonious company when practicing psychic powers. The best
psychometrists usually keep the physical eyes closed when practicing their
power.

You have doubtless heard the sensing of sealed letters spoken of as
clairvoyance. But this is merely one form of psychometry. The letter is a
very good connecting medium in psychometric experiments. I advise you to
begin your experiments with old letters. You will be surprised to discover
how readily you will begin to receive psychic impressions from the
letters, either from the person who wrote them, or from the place in which
they were written, or from some one connected with the subsequent history.
One of the most interesting experiments I ever witnessed in psychometry,
was a case in which a letter that had been forwarded from place to place,
until it had gone completely around the globe, was psychometrized by a
young Hindu maiden. Although ignorant of the outside world, she was able
to picture the people and scenery of every part of the globe in which the
letter had traveled. Her report was really an interesting "travelogue" of
a trip around the world, given in tabloid form. You may obtain some
interesting results in psychometrizing old letters--but always be
conscientious about it, and refrain from divulging the secrets that will
become yours in the course of these experiments. Be honorable on the
astral plane, as well as on the physical--more so, rather than less.




LESSON VII.

CLAIRVOYANT CRYSTAL GAZING.


As I have informed you in the preceding lesson, Crystal Gazing is the
second method of getting en rapport with the astral plane. Under the
general term "Crystal Gazing" I include the entire body of phenomena
connected with the use of the crystal, magic mirror, etc., the underlying
principle being the same in all of such cases.

The crystal, etc., serves to focus the psychic energy of the person, in
such a way that the astral senses are induced to function more readily
than ordinarily. The student is cautioned against regarding the crystal,
or magic mirror, as possessing any particular magic power in itself. On
the contrary, the crystal, or magic mirror serves merely as a physical
instrument for the astral vision, just as the telescope or microscope
performs a similar office for the physical vision. Some persons are
superstitious regarding the crystal, and accord to it some weird
supernatural power, but the true occultist, understanding the laws of the
phenomena arising from its use, does not fall into this error.

But, notwithstanding what I have just said, I would be neglecting my full
duty in the matter if I failed to call your attention to the fact that the
continued use of a particular crystal often has the effect of polarizing
its molecules so as to render it a far more efficient instrument as time
passes by. The longer the crystal is used by one person, the better does
it seem to serve the uses of that person. I agree with many users of the
crystal in their belief that each person should keep his crystal for his
own personal use, and not allow it to be used indiscriminately by
strangers or persons not in sympathy with occult thought. The crystal
tends to become polarized according to the requirements of the person
habitually using it, and it is foolish to allow this to be interfered
with.

The use of crystals and other bright, shining objects, has been common to
psychic investigators of all times, and in practically all lands. In the
earlier days of the race, pieces of clear quartz or shining pebbles were
generally employed. Sometimes pieces of polished metal were so used. In
fact, nearly every object capable of being polished has been employed in
this way at some time, by some person. In our own day, the same condition
exists. In Australia the native sooth-sayers and magicians employ water
and other shining objects, and, in some cases, even bright flame, sparks,
or glowing embers. In New Zealand, the natives frequently employ drops of
blood held in the hollow of the hand. The Fijians fill a hole with water,
and gaze into it. South American tribes use the polished surface of black,
or dark colored stones. The American Indians use water, or shining pieces
or flint or quartz. Shining pieces of metal are frequently used by the
primitive races. Lang, writing on the subject, has said: "They stare into
a crystal ball; a cup; a mirror; a blot of ink (Egypt and India); a drop
of blood (the Maoris of New Zealand); a bowl of water (American Indians);
a pond (Roman and African); water in a glass bowl (Fez); or almost any
polished surface, etc."

In the present-day revival of interest in crystal-gazing among the
wealthier classes of Europe and America, some of the high-priced teachers
have insisted upon their pupils purchasing pure crystal globes, claiming
that these alone are capable of serving the purpose fully. But, as such
crystals are very expensive, this advice has prevented many from
experimenting. But, the advice is erroneous, for any globe of clear
quartz, or even moulded glass, will serve the purpose equally well, and
there is no need of spending twenty-five to fifty dollars for a pure
crystal globe.

For that matter, you may obtain very good results from the use of a
watch-crystal laid over a piece of black velvet. Some, today, use with the
best effect small polished pieces of silver or other bright metal. Others
follow the old plan of using a large drop of ink, poured into a small
butter plate. Some have small cups painted black on the inside, into which
they pour water--and obtain excellent results therefrom.

Above all, I caution the student to pay no attention to instructions
regarding the necessity of performing incantations or ceremonies over the
crystal or other object employed in crystal-gazing. This is but a bit of
idle superstition, and serves no useful purpose except, possibly, that of
giving the person confidence in the thing. All ceremonies of this kind
have for their purpose merely the holding of the attention of the person
investigating, and giving him confidence in-the result--the latter having
a decided psychological value, of course.

There are but few general directions necessary for the person wishing to
experiment in crystal gazing. The principal thing is to maintain quiet,
and an earnest, serious state of mind--do not make a merry game of it, if
you wish to obtain results. Again, always have the light behind your back,
instead of facing you. Gaze calmly at the crystal, but do not strain your
eyes. Do not try to avoid winking your eyes--there is a difference between
"gazing" and "staring," remember. Some good authorities advise making
funnels of the hands, and using them as you would a pair of opera glasses.

In many cases, a number of trials are required before you will be able to
get good results. In others, at least some results are obtained at the
first trial. It is a good plan to try to bring into vision something that
you have already seen with the physical eyes--some familiar object. The
first sign of actual psychic seeing in the crystal usually appears as a
cloudy appearance, or "milky-mist," the crystal gradually losing its
transparency. In this milky cloud then gradually appears a form, or face,
or scene of some kind, more or less plainly defined. If you have ever
developed a photographic film or plate, you will know how the picture
gradually comes into view.

W.T. Stead, the eminent English investigator of psychic phenomena, has
written as follows regarding the phenomena of crystal-gazing: "There are
some persons who cannot look into an ordinary globular bottle without
seeing pictures form themselves without any effort or will on their part,
in the crystal globe. Crystal-gazing seems to be the least dangerous and
most simple of all forms of experimenting. You simply look into a crystal
globe the size of a five-shilling piece, or a water-bottle which is full
of clear water, and which is placed so that too much light does not fall
upon it, and then simply look at it. You make no incantations, and engage
in no mumbo-jumbo business; you simply look at it for two or three
minutes, taking care not to tire yourself, winking as much as you please,
but fixing your thought upon whatever you wish to see. Then, if you have
the faculty, the glass will cloud over with a milky mist, and in the
centre the image is gradually precipitated in just the same way as a
photograph forms on the sensitive plate."

The same authority relates the following interesting experiment with the
crystal: "Miss X., upon looking into the crystal on two occasions as a
test, to see if she could see me when she was several miles off, saw not
me, but a different friend of mine on each occasion. She had never seen
either of my friends before, but immediately identified them both on
seeing them afterward at my office. On one of the evenings on which we
experimented in the vain attempts to photograph a 'double,' I dined with
Madam C. and her friend at a neighboring restaurant. As she glanced at the
water-bottle, Madam C. saw a picture beginning to form, and, looking at it
from curiosity, described with considerable detail an elderly gentleman
whom she had never seen before, and whom I did not in the least recognize
from her description at the moment. Three hours afterward, when the seance
was over, Madam C., entered the room and recognized Mr. Elliott, of
Messrs. Elliott & Fry, as the gentleman whom she had seen and described in
the water-bottle at the restaurant. On another occasion the picture was
less agreeable; it was an old man lying dead in bed with some one weeping
at his feet; but who it was, or what it related to, no one knew."

Andrew Lang, another prominent investigator of psychic phenomena, gives
the following interesting experiment in crystal-gazing: "I had given a
glass ball to a young lady, Miss Baillie, who had scarcely any success
with it. She lent it to Miss Leslie, who saw a large, square,
old-fashioned red sofa covered with muslin (which she, afterward found in
the next country-house she visited). Miss Baillie's brother, a young
athlete, laughed at these experiments, took the ball into his study, and
came back looking 'gey gash.' He admitted that he had seen a
vision--somebody he knew, under a lamp. He said that he would discover
during the week whether or not he had seen right. This was at 5:30 on a
Sunday afternoon. On Tuesday, Mr. Baillie was at a dance in a town forty
miles from his home, and met a Miss Preston. 'On Sunday,' he said, 'about
half-past-five, you were sitting under a standard lamp, in a dress I never
saw you wear, a blue blouse with lace over the shoulders, pouring out tea
for a man in blue serge, whose back was toward me, so that I only saw the
tip of his mustache.' 'Why, the blinds must have been up,' said Miss
Preston. 'I was at Dulby,' said Mr. Baillie, and he undeniably was."

Miss X., the well-known contributor to the English magazine, "Borderland,"
several years ago, made a somewhat extended inquiry into the phenomena of
crystal-gazing. From her experiments, she made the following
classification of the phenomena of crystal-vision, which I herewith
reproduce for your benefit. Her classification is as follows:

1. Images of something unconsciously observed. New reproductions,
voluntary or spontaneous, and bringing no fresh knowledge to the mind.

2. Images of ideas unconsciously acquired from others. Some memory or
imaginative effect, which does not come from the gazer's ordinary self.
Revivals of memory. Illustrations of thought.

3. Images, clairvoyant or prophetic. Pictures giving information as to
something past, present, or future, which the gazer has no other chance of
knowing.

As a matter of fact, each and every form or phase of clairvoyance possible
under other methods of inducing clairvoyant vision, is possible in
crystal-gazing. It is a mistake to consider crystal-gazing as a separate
and distinct form of psychic phenomena. Crystal-gazing is merely one
particular form or method of inducing psychic or clairvoyant vision. If
you will keep this in mind, you will avoid many common errors and
misunderstandings in the matter.

In order to give you the benefit of as many points of view as possible, I
shall now quote from an old English writer on the subject of the use of
the crystal. I do this realizing that sometimes a particular student will
get more from one point of view, than from another--some particular
phrasing will seem to reach his understanding, where others fail. The
directions of the English authority are as follows:

"What is desired through the regular use of the translucent sphere is to
cultivate a personal degree of clairvoyant power, so that visions of
things or events, past, present, and future, may appear clearly to the
interior vision, or eye of the soul. In the pursuit of this effort only,
the crystal becomes at once both a beautiful, interesting and harmless
channel of pleasure and instruction, shorn of dangers, and rendered
conducive to mental development.

"To the attainment of this desirable end, attention is asked to the
following practical directions, which, if carefully followed, will lead to
success:

"(1) Select a quiet room where you will be entirely undisturbed, taking
care that it is as far as possible free from mirrors, ornaments,
pictures, glaring colors, and the like, which may otherwise district the
attention. The room should be of comfortable temperature, in accordance
with the time of year, neither hot nor cold. About 60 to 65 deg. Fahr. is
suitable in most cases, though allowance can be made where necessary for
natural differences in the temperaments of various persons. Thus thin,
nervous, delicately-organized individuals, and those of lymphatic and
soft, easy-going, passive types, require a slightly warmer apartment than
the more positive class who are known by their dark eyes, hair and
complexion, combined with prominent joints. Should a fire, or any form of
artificial light be necessary, it should be well screened off, so as to
prevent the light rays from being reflected in, or in any manner directly
reaching the crystal. The room should not be dark, but rather shadowed, or
charged with a dull light, somewhat such as prevails on a cloudy or wet
day.

"(2) The crystal should be placed on its stand on a table, or it may rest
on a black velvet cushion, but in either case it should be partially
surrounded by a black silk or similar wrap or screen, so adjusted as to
cut off any undesirable reflection. Before beginning to experiment,
remember that most frequently nothing will be seen on the first occasion,
and possibly not for several sittings; though some sitters, if strongly
gifted with psychic powers in a state of unconscious, and sometimes
conscious degree of unfoldment, may be fortunate enough to obtain good
results at the very first trial. If, therefore, nothing is perceived
during the first few attempts, do not despair or become impatient, or
imagine that you will never see anything. There is a royal road to crystal
vision, but it is open only to the combined password of Calmness,
Patience, and Perseverance. If at the first attempt to ride a bicycle,
failure ensues, the only way to learn is to pay attention to the necessary
rules, and to persevere daily until the ability to ride comes naturally.
Thus it is with the would-be seer. Persevere in accordance with these
simple directions, and success will sooner or later crown your efforts.

"(3) Commence by sitting comfortably with the eyes fixed upon the crystal,
not by a fierce stare, but with a steady, calm gaze, for ten minutes only,
on the first occasion. In taking the time it is best to hang your watch at
a distance, where, while the face is clearly visible, the ticking is
rendered inaudible. When the time is up, carefully put the crystal away in
its case, and keep it in a dark place, under lock and key, allowing no one
but yourself to handle it. At the second sitting, which should be at the
same place, in the same position, and at the same time, you may increase
the length of the effort to fifteen minutes, and continue for this period
during the next five or six sittings, after which the time may be
gradually increased, but should in no case exceed one hour. The precise
order of repetition is always to be followed until the experimenter has
developed an almost automatic ability to readily obtain results, when it
needs no longer to be adhered to.

"(4) Any person, or persons, admitted to the room, and allowed to remain
while you sit, should (a) keep absolute silence, and (b) remain seated at
a distance from you. When you have developed your latent powers, questions
may, of course, be put to you by one of those present, but even then in a
very gentle, or low and slow tone of voice; never suddenly, or in a
forceful manner.

"(5) When you find the crystal begins to look dull or cloudy, with small
pin-points of light glittering therein, like tiny stars, you may know that
you are commencing to obtain that for which you seek--viz., crystalline
vision. Therefore, persevere with confidence. This condition may, or may
not, continue for several sittings, the crystal seeming at times to
alternately appear and disappear, as in a mist. By and by this hazy
appearance, in its turn, will give place quite suddenly to a blindness of
the senses to all else but a blue or bluish ocean of space, against which,
as if it were a background, the vision will be clearly apparent.

"(6) The crystal should not be used soon after taking a meal, and care
should be taken in matters of diet to partake only of digestible foods,
and to avoid alcoholic beverages. Plain and nourishing food, and outdoor
exercise, with contentment of mind, or love of simplicity in living, are
great aids to success. Mental anxiety, or ill-health, are not conducive to
the desired end. Attention to correct, breathing is of importance.

"(7) As regards the time at which events seen will come to pass, each seer
is usually impressed with regard thereto; but, as a general rule, visions
appearing in the extreme background indicate time more remote, either past
or future, than those perceived nearer at hand, while those appearing in
the foreground, or closer to the seer, denote the present or immediate
future.

"(8) Two principal classes of vision will present themselves to the
sitter--(a) the Symbolic, indicated by the appearance of symbols such as a
flag, boat, knife, gold, etc., and (b) Actual Scenes and Personages, in
action or otherwise. Persons of a positive type of organization, the more
active, excitable, yet decided type, are most likely to perceive
symbolically, or allegorically; while those of a passive nature usually
receive direct or literal revelations. Both classes will find it necessary
to carefully cultivate truthfulness, unselfishness, gratitude for what is
shown, and absolute confidence in the love, wisdom, and guidance of God
Himself."

As the student proceeds with the study of these lessons, he will become
acquainted with various details and methods concerned with the various
phases of clairvoyance, which knowledge he may then combine with the
above, the whole aiding him in the successful manifestation of the psychic
phenomena of crystal-gazing, which, as I have said, is merely one phase of
clairvoyance and under the same general laws and rules of manifestation.
Remember that present, past and future clairvoyance all is possible to
the highly developed crystal gazer.

THE ASTRAL TUBE. Closely allied with the phenomena of crystal-gazing,
and that of psychometry, is that which occultists know as "the astral
tube," although this psychic channel may be developed in ordinary
clairvoyance by means of the power of concentrated attention, etc. I shall
not enter into a detailed or technical discussion of the astral tube, at
this place, but I wish to give you a general and comprehensive view of it
and its workings.

In case of the strong concentration of the mind, in cases of psychometry
or crystal-gazing, a channel or "line of force" is set up in the astral
substance which composes the basis of the astral plane. This is like the
wake of a ship made on the surface of the water through which the ship has
passed. Or it is like a current of magnetic force in the ether. It is
caused by a polarization of the particles composing the astral substance,
which manifest in a current of intense vibrations in the astral substance,
which thus serve as a ready channel for the transmission of psychic force
or astral energy.

The astral tube serves as a ready conductor of the vibrations, currents
and waves of energy on the astral plane which carry to the astral senses
of the person the perception of the things, objects and scenes far removed
from him in space and time. How these things far removed in space and time
are perceived by the astral seer is explained in subsequent lessons of
this course. At this place we are concerned merely with the "channel"
through which the currents of energy flow, and which has been called the
astral tube.

As a writer well says: "Through the astral tube the astral senses actually
'sense' the sights, and often the sounds, being manifested at a distance,
just as one may see distant sights through a telescope, or hear distant
sounds through a telephone. The astral tube is used in a variety of forms
of psychic phenomena. It is often used unconsciously, and springs into
existence spontaneously, under the strong influence of a vivid emotion,
desire or will. It is used by the trained psychometrist, without the use
of any 'starting point,' or 'focal centre,' simply by the use of his
trained, developed and concentrated will. But its most familiar and common
use is in connection with some object serving as a starting point or focal
centre. The starting point or focal centre, above mentioned, is generally
either what is known as the 'associated object' in the class of phenomena
generally known as psychometry, or else a glass or crystal ball, or
similar polished surface, in what is known as crystal-gazing."

Another authority tells his readers that: "Astral sight, when it is
cramped by being directed along what is practically a tube, is limited
very much as physical sight would be under similar circumstances, though
if possessed in perfection it will continue to show, even at that
distance, the auras, and therefore all the emotions and most of the
thoughts of the people under observation. * * * But, it may be said, the
mere fact that he is using astral sight ought to enable him to see things
from all sides at once. And so it would, if he were using that sight in a
normal way upon an object which was fairly near him--within his astral
reach, as it were; but at a distance of hundreds or thousands of miles the
case is very different. Astral sight gives us the advantage of an
additional dimension, but there is still such a thing as position in that
dimension, and it is naturally a potent factor in limiting the use of the
powers on that plane. * * * The limitations resemble those of a man using
a telescope on the physical plane. The experimenter, for example, has a
particular field of view which cannot be enlarged or altered; he is
looking at his scene from a certain direction, and he cannot suddenly turn
it all around and see how it looks from the other side. If he has
sufficient psychic energy to spare, he may drop altogether the telescope
he is using, and manufacture an entirely new one for himself which will
approach his objective somewhat differently; but this is not a course at
all likely to be adopted in practice."

The student will find that, as we progress, many of these points which now
seem complicated and obscure will gradually take on the aspect of
simplicity and clearness. We must crawl before we can walk, in psychic
research as well as in everything else.




LESSON VIII.

CLAIRVOYANT REVERIE.


In the preceding two chapters, I have asked you to consider the first two
methods of inducing the clairvoyant phenomena, namely, Psychometry, and
Crystal-Gazing, respectively. In these cases you have seen how the
clairvoyant gets en rapport with the astral plane by means of physical
objects, in the case of psychometric clairvoyance; or by means of a
shining object, in the case of crystal gazing. Let us now consider the
third method of inducing the clairvoyant condition or state, i.e., by
means of what may be called Clairvoyant Reverie, in which the clairvoyant
gets en rapport with the astral plane by means of psychic states in which
the sights, sounds and thoughts of the material and physical plane are
shut out of consciousness.

The student of the general subject of clairvoyance will soon be impressed
with two facts concerning the production of clairvoyant phenomena, namely,
(1) that in the majority of the recorded cases of the investigators the
clairvoyant phenomena were obtained when the clairvoyant was in the state
of sleep, or at least semi-sleep or drowsiness, the visioning appearing
more or less like a vivid dream; and (2) that in the case of the
clairvoyant voluntarily entering en rapport with the astral plane, he or
she would enter into what seemed to be a kind of trance condition, in some
cases an absolute unconsciousness of the outside world being manifested.
The student, noting these facts, is apt to arrive at the conclusion that
all clairvoyance is accompanied by the condition of sleep, or trance, and
that no clairvoyant phenomena are possible unless this psychic condition
is first obtained. But this is only a half-truth as we shall see in a
moment.

In the first place, the student arriving at this conclusion seems to have
ignored the fact that the phenomena of psychometry and crystal gazing,
respectively, are as true instances of clairvoyance as are those which are
manifested in the sleep or trance condition. It is true that some
psychometrists produce phenomena when they are in a state of psychic
quiescence, but, on the other hand, many clairvoyant psychometrists merely
concentrate the attention on the object before them, and remain perfectly
wide-awake and conscious on the physical plane. Likewise, the average
crystal gazer remains perfectly wide-awake and conscious on the physical
plane. When the student takes these facts into consideration, he begins to
see that the trance condition, and similar psychic states, are simply
particular methods of inducing the en rapport condition for the
clairvoyant, and are not inseparably bound up with the phenomena of
clairvoyance.

As the student progresses, moreover, he will see that even in the case of
Clairvoyant Reverie, the third method of inducing the astral en rapport
condition, the clairvoyant does not always lose consciousness. In the case
of many advanced and exceptionally well-developed clairvoyants, no trance
or sleep condition is induced. In such cases the clairvoyant merely "shuts
out" the outside world of sights, sounds and thoughts, by an effort of
trained will, and then concentrates steadily on the phenomena of the
astral plane. For that matter, the skilled and advanced occultist is able
to function on the astral plane by simply shifting his consciousness from
one plane to another, as the typist shifts from the small letters of the
keyboard to the capital letters, by a mere pressure on the shift-key of
the typewriter.

The only reason that many clairvoyants manifesting along the lines of the
third method, known as "clairvoyant reverie," fall into the trance or
sleep condition, is that they have not as yet acquired the rare art of
controlling their conscious attention at will--this is something that
requires great practice. They find it easier to drop into the condition of
semi-trance, or semi-sleep, than it is to deliberately shut out the outer
world by an act of pure will. Moreover, you will find that in the majority
of the recorded cases of the investigators, the clairvoyance was more or
less spontaneous on the part of the clairvoyant person, and was not
produced by an act of will. As we proceed to consider the various forms
and phases of clairvoyant phenomena, in these lessons, you will notice
this fact. There are but few recorded cases of voluntary clairvoyance in
the books of the investigators--the skilled clairvoyants, and more
particularly the advanced occultists, avoid the investigators rather than
seek them; they have no desire to be reported as "typical cases" of
interesting psychic phenomena--they leave that to the amateurs, and those
to whom the phenomena come as a wonderful revelation akin to a miracle.
This accounts for the apparent predominance of this form of
clairvoyance--the secret is that the net of the investigators has caught
only a certain kind of psychic fish, while the others escape attention.

All this would be of no practical importance, however, were it not for the
fact that the average student is so impressed by the fact that he must
learn to induce the trance condition in order to manifest clairvoyant
phenomena, that he does not even think of attempting to do the work
otherwise. The power of auto-suggestion operates here, as you will see by
a moment's thought, and erects an obstacle to his advance along voluntary
lines. More than this, this mistaken idea tends to encourage the student
to cultivate the trance condition, or at least some abnormal psychic
condition, by artificial means. I am positively opposed to the inducing of
psychic conditions by artificial means, for I consider such practices most
injurious and harmful for the person using such methods. Outside of
anything else, it tends to render the person negative, psychically,
instead of positive--it tends to make him or her subject to the psychic
influence of others, on both the physical and astral plane, instead of
retaining his or her own self-control and mastery.

The best authorities among the occultists instruct their pupils that the
state of clairvoyant reverie may be safely and effectively induced by the
practice of mental concentration alone. They advice positively against
artificial methods. A little common sense will show that they are right in
this matter. All that is needed is that the consciousness shall be focused
to a point--become "one pointed" as the Hindu Yogis say. The intelligent
practice of concentration accomplishes this, without the necessity of any
artificial methods of development, or the induction of abnormal psychic
states.

If you will stop a moment and realize how easily you concentrate your
attention when you are witnessing an interesting play, or listening to a
beautiful rendition of some great masterpiece of musical composition, or
gazing at some miracle of art, you will see what I mean. In the cases just
mentioned, while your attention is completely occupied with the
interesting thing before you, so that you have almost completely shut out
the outer world of sound, sight and thought, you are, nevertheless,
perfectly wide awake and your consciousness is alert. The same thing is
true when you are reading a very interesting book--the world is shut out
from your consciousness, and you are oblivious to the sights and sounds
around you. At the risk of being considered flippant, I would remind you
of the common spectacle of two lovers so wrapped up in each other's
company that they forget that there is a smiling world of people around
them--time and space are forgotten to the two lovers--to them there is
only one world, with but two persons in it. Again, how often have you
fallen into what is known as a "brown study," or "day dream," in which you
have been so occupied with the thoughts and fancies floating through your
mind, that you forgot all else. Well, then, this will give you a
common-sense idea of the state that the occultists teach may be induced in
order to enter into the state of en rapport with the astral plane--the
state in which clairvoyance is possible. Whether you are seeking
clairvoyance by the method of psychometry, or by crystal gazing, or by
clairvoyant reverie--this will give you the key to the state. It is a
perfectly natural state--nothing abnormal about it, you will notice.

To some who may think that I am laying too much stress on the
undesirability of artificial methods of inducing the clairvoyant
condition, I would say that they are probably not aware of the erroneous
and often harmful teachings on the subject that are being promulgated by
ignorant or misinformed teachers--"a little learning is a dangerous
thing," in many cases. It may surprise some of my students to learn that
some of this class of teachers are instructing their pupils to practice
methods of self-hypnosis by gazing steadily at a bright object until they
fall unconscious; or by gazing "cross eyed" at the tip of the nose, or at
an object held between the two eyebrows. These are familiar methods of
certain schools of hypnotism, and result in producing a state of
artificial hypnosis, more or less deep. Such a state is most undesirable,
not only by reason of its immediate effects, but also by reason of the
fact that it often results in a condition of abnormal sensitiveness to the
will of others, or even to the thoughts and feelings of others, on both
the astral and the physical planes of life. I emphatically warn my
students against any such practices, or anything resembling them.

While I dislike to dwell on the subject, I feel that I should call the
attention of my students to the fact that certain teachers seek to produce
the abnormal psychic condition by means of exhausting breathing exercises,
which make the person dizzy and sleepy. This is all wrong. While rhythmic
breathing exercises have a certain value in psychic phenomena, and are
harmless when properly practiced, nevertheless such practices as those to
which I have alluded are harmful to the nervous system of the person, and
also tend to induce undesirable psychic conditions. Again, some teachers
have sought to have their students hold their breath for comparatively
long periods of time in order to bring about abnormal psychic states. The
slightest knowledge of physiology informs one that such a practice must be
harmful; it causes the blood to become thick and impure, and deficient in
oxygen. It certainly will produce a kind of drowsiness, for the same
reason that impure air in a room will do the same thing--in both cases the
blood stream is poisoned and made impure. The purpose of rational and
normal breathing is to obviate just this thing--so these teachers are
reversing a natural law of the body, in order to produce an abnormal
psychic state. With all the energy in me, I caution you against this kind
of thing.

Along the same line, I protest and warn you against the practices advised
by certain teachers of "psychic development," who seek to have their
pupils induce abnormal physical and psychic conditions by means of drugs,
odor of certain chemicals, gases, etc. Such practices, as all true
occultists know, belong to the clans of the Black Magicians, or devil
worshippers, of the savage races--they have no place in true occult
teachings. Common sense alone should warn persons away from such
things--but it seems to fail some of them. I assert without fear of
intelligent contradiction, that no true occultist ever countenances any
such practices as these.

All the true teachers are vigorous in their denunciation of such false
teachings and harmful practices. In this same category, I place the
methods which are taught by certain persons, namely, that of inducing
abnormal physical and psychic condition of giddiness and haziness by means
of "whirling" around in a circle until one drops from giddiness, or until
one "feels queer in the head." This is a revival of the practices of
certain fanatics in Persia and India, who perform it as a religious rite
until they fall into what they consider a "holy sleep," but which is
nothing more than an abnormal and unhealthful physical and psychic
condition. Such practices are a downward step, not an upward one. It seems
a pity that the necessity has arisen for such warnings as these--but my
duty, as I see it, is very plain. To all who are tempted to "develop" in
this way, I say, positively, "DON'T!"

The scientific, rational way to develop the astral senses is to first
acquire the art of concentrating. Bear in mind that in concentration the
person, while shutting out the impressions of the outside world in
general, nevertheless focuses and concentrates his attention upon the one
matter before him. This is quite a different thing from making oneself
sensitive to every current of thought and feeling that may be in the
psychic atmosphere. True concentration renders one positive, while the
other methods render one negative. Contrary to the common opinion, psychic
concentration is a positive state, not a negative--an active state, not a
passive one. The person who is able to concentrate strongly is a master,
while one who opens himself to "control," either physical or astral, is
more or less of a slave to other minds.

The student who will begin by experimenting along the lines of contact
mind-reading, and who then advances along the lines of true telepathy, as
explained in the earlier chapters of this book, will have made a good
start, and considerable progress, along the road to clairvoyant
development. The rest will be largely a matter of exercise and practice.
He will be aided by practicing concentration along the general lines of
the best occult teaching. Such practice may consist of concentration upon
almost any physical object, keeping the thing well before the mind and
attention. Do not tire the attention by practicing too long at one time.
The following general rules will help you in developing concentration:

(1) The attention attaches more readily to interesting rather than
uninteresting things. Therefore, select some interesting thing to study
and analyze by concentrated thought.

(2) The attention will decline in strength unless there is a variation in
the stimulus. Therefore, keep up the power of concentration by either
changing the object you are observing; or else by discovering some new
properties, qualities or attributes in it.

(3) The things you wish to shut out of consciousness can best be shut out
by your concentration upon some other thing--the attention can dwell only
upon one thing at a time, if focused upon that one thing.

(4) The power of applying your attention, steady and undissipated, to a
single object, is a mark of strong will and superior mental
discipline--weak-minds cannot do this. Therefore, in cultivating
concentrated attention you are really strengthening your mind and will.

(5) To develop concentrated attention, you must learn to analyze, analyze,
and analyze the thing upon which you are bestowing concentrated attention.
Therefore, proceed by selecting an object and analyzing it by concentrated
attention, taking one part after another, one by one, until you have
analyzed and mastered the whole object. Give it the same attention that
the lover gives his loved one; the musician his favorite composition; the
artist his favorite work of art; and the booklover his favorite book--when
you have accomplished this, you have mastered concentration, and will be
able to apply the mind "one pointed" upon anything you wish, physical or
astral; and, consequently will have no trouble in shutting-out disturbing
impressions.

(6) Learn to concentrate on the physical plane, and you will be able to
concentrate on the astral plane as well. By the one who has mastered
concentration, trances and abnormal psychic states will not be needed. The
needle-pointed mind is able to pierce the astral veil at will, while the
blunt-pointed mind is resisted and defeated by the astral envelope, which
while thin is very tough and unyielding.

A well-known authority on psychic development has well said: "Occasional
flashes of clairvoyance sometimes come to the highly cultured and
spiritual-minded man, even though he may never have heard of the
possibility of training such a faculty. In his case such glimpses usually
signify that he is approaching that stage in his evolution when these
powers will naturally begin to manifest themselves. Their appearance
should serve as an additional stimulus to him to strive to maintain that
high standard of moral purity and mental balance without which
clairvoyance is a curse and not a blessing to its possessor. Between those
who are entirely unimpressionable and those who are in full possession of
clairvoyant power, there are many intermediate stages. Students often ask
how this clairvoyant faculty will first be manifested in themselves--how
they may know when they have reached the stage at which its first faint
foreshadowings are beginning to be visible. Cases differ so widely that it
is impossible to give to this question any answer that will be universally
applicable.

"Some people begin by a plunge, as it were, and under some unusual
stimulus become able just for once to see some striking vision; and very
often in such a case, because the experience does not repeat itself, the
seer comes in time to believe that on that occasion he must have been the
victim of hallucination. Others begin by becoming intermittently conscious
of the brilliant colors and vibrations of the human aura; yet others find
themselves with increasing frequency seeing and hearing something to which
those around them are blind and deaf; others, again, see faces,
landscapes, or colored clouds floating before their eyes in the dark
before they sink to rest; while perhaps the commonest experience of all is
that of those who begin to recollect with greater and greater clearness
what they have seen and heard on other planes during sleep."

The authority in question gives the following excellent advice regarding
the subject of the development of clairvoyant power and astral visioning:
"Now the fact is that there are many methods by which it may be developed,
but only one which can be at all safely recommended for general use--that
of which we shall speak last of all. Among the less advanced nations of
the world the clairvoyant state has been produced in various objectionable
ways; among some of the non-Aryan tribes of India, by the use of
intoxicating drugs or the inhaling of stupefying fumes; among the
dervishes, by whirling in a mad dance of religious fervor until vertigo
and insensibility supervene; among the followers of the abominable
practices of the Voodoo cult, by frightful sacrifices and loathsome rites
of black magic. Methods such as these are happily not in vogue in our own
race, yet even among us large numbers of dabblers in this ancient art
adopt some plan of self-hypnotization, such as gazing at a bright spot, or
the repetition of some formula until a condition of semi-stupefaction is
produced; while yet another school among them would endeavor to arrive at
similar results by the use of some of the Indian systems of regulation of
the breath. All these methods are unequivocally to be condemned as quite
unsafe for the practice of the ordinary man who has no idea of what he is
doing--who is simply making vague experiments in an unknown world. Even
the method of obtaining clairvoyance by allowing oneself to be mesmerized
by another person is one from which I should myself shrink with the most
decided distaste; and assuredly it should never be attempted except under
conditions of absolute trust and affection between the magnetizer and the
magnetized, and a perfection of purity in heart and soul, in mind and
intention, such as is rarely to be seen among any but the greatest of
saints.

"Yet there is one practice which is advised by all religions alike--which
if adopted carefully and reverently can do no harm to any human being, yet
from which a very pure type of clairvoyance has sometimes been developed;
and that is the practice of meditation. Let a man choose a certain time
every day--a time when he can rely upon being quiet and undisturbed,
though preferably in the daytime rather than at night--and set himself at
that time to keep his mind for a few minutes entirely free from all
earthly thoughts of any kind whatever, and, when that is achieved, to
direct the whole force of his being towards the highest ideal that he
happens to know. He will find that to gain such perfect control of thought
is enormously more difficult than he supposes, but when he attains it it
cannot but be in every way most beneficial to him, and as he grows more
and more able to elevate and concentrate his thought, he may gradually
find that new worlds are opening before his sight. As a preliminary
training towards the satisfactory achievement of such meditation, he will
find it desirable to make a practice of concentration in the affairs of
daily life--even in the smallest of them. If he writes a letter, let him
think of nothing else but that letter until it is finished; if he reads a
book, let him see to it that his thought is never allowed to wander from
his author's meaning. He must learn to hold his mind in check, and to be
master of that also, as well as of his lower passions; he must patiently
labor to acquire absolute control of his thoughts, so that he will always
know exactly what he is thinking about, and why--so that he can use his
mind, and turn it or hold it still, as a practiced swordsman turns his
weapon where he will."

I have given the above full quotation from this authority, not merely
because that from another angle he states the same general principles as
do I; but also because his personal experience in actual clairvoyant
phenomena is so extended and varied that any word from him on the subject
of the development of clairvoyant power must have a value of its own.
While I differ from this authority on some points of detail of theory and
practice, nevertheless I gladly testify to the soundness of his views as
above quoted, and pass them on to my students for careful consideration
and attention. The student will do well to heed what he has to say, and to
combine such opinion with what I have uttered in the earlier part of this
chapter--there will be found a close agreement in principle and practice.

And, now let us pass on to a consideration of the various forms and phases
of the clairvoyant phenomena itself. The subject is fascinating, and I am
sure that you will enjoy this little excursion into the strange realm of
thought regarding the astral phenomena of clairvoyance. But, be sure to
master each lesson before proceeding to the rest, as otherwise you will
have to turn back the leaves of the course in order to pick up some point
of teaching that you have neglected.




LESSON IX.

SIMPLE CLAIRVOYANCE.


In a previous chapter we have seen that there are three well-defined
classes of clairvoyance, namely, (1) Simple clairvoyance; (2) Clairvoyance
in space; and (3) Clairvoyance in Time. I shall now consider these in
sequence, beginning with the first, Simple Clairvoyance.

In simple clairvoyance the clairvoyant person merely senses the auric
emanations of other persons, such as the auric vibrations, colors, etc.,
currents of thought vibrations, etc., but does not see events or scenes
removed in space or time from the observer. There are other phenomena
peculiar to this class of clairvoyance which I shall note as we progress
with this chapter.

An authority on the subject of astral phenomena has written interestingly,
as follows, regarding some of the phases of simple clairvoyance: "When we
come to consider the additional facilities which it offers in the
observation of animate objects, we see still more clearly the advantages
of astral vision. It exhibits to the clairvoyant the aura of plants and
animals, and thus in the case of the latter their desires and emotions,
and whatever thoughts they may have, are all plainly shown before his
eyes. But it is in dealing with human beings that he will most appreciate
the value of this faculty, for he will often be able to help them far more
effectually when he guides himself by the information which it gives him.

"He will be able to see the aura as far up as the astral body, and though
that leaves all the higher part of a man still hidden from his gaze, he
will nevertheless find it possible by careful observation to learn a good
deal about the higher part from what is within his reach. His capacity of
examination of the etheric double will give him considerable advantage in
locating and classifying any defects or diseases of the nervous system,
while from the appearance of the astral body he will at once be aware of
all the emotions, passions, desires and tendencies of the man before him,
and even of very many of his thoughts also.

"As he looks at a person he will see him surrounded by the luminous mist
of the astral aura, flashing with all sorts of brilliant colors, and
constantly changing in hue and brilliancy with every variation of the
person's thoughts and feelings. He will see this aura flooded with the
beautiful rose-color of pure affection, the rich blue of devotional
feeling, the hard, dull brown of selfishness, the deep scarlet of anger,
the horrible lurid red of sensuality, the livid grey of fear, the black
clouds of hatred and malice, or any of the other hundredfold indications
so easily to be read in it by the practiced eye; and thus it will be
impossible for any persons to conceal from him the real state of their
feelings on any subject. Not only does the astral aura show him the
temporary result of the emotion passing through it at the moment, but it
also gives him, by an arrangement and proportion of its colors when in a
condition of comparative rest, a clue to the general disposition and
character of its owner."

By simple clairvoyance in a certain stage of development the clairvoyant
person is able to sense the presence of the human aura, by means of his
astral sight. The human aura, as all students of occultism know, is that
peculiar emanation of astral vibrations that extends from each living
human being, surrounding him in an egg-shaped form for a distance of two
to three feet on all sides. This peculiar nebulous envelope is not visible
to the physical sight, and may be discerned only by means of the astral
senses. It, however, may be dimly "felt" by many persons coming into the
presence of other persons, and constitutes a personal atmosphere which is
sensed by other persons.

The trained clairvoyant vision sees the human aura as a nebulous hazy
substance, like a luminous cloud, surrounding the person for two or three
feet on each side of his body, being more dense near the body and
gradually becoming less dense as it extends away from the body. It has a
phosphorescent appearance, with a peculiar tremulous motion manifesting
through its substance. The clairvoyant sees the human aura as composed of
all the colors of the spectrum, the combination shifting with the changing
mental and emotional states of the person. But, in a general way, it may
be said that each person has his or her or distinctive astral auric
colors, depending upon his or her general character or personality. Each
mental state, or emotional manifestation, has its own particular shade or
combination of shades of auric coloring. This beautiful kaleidoscopic
spectacle has its own meaning to the advanced occultist with clairvoyant
vision, for he is able to read the character and general mental states of
the person by means of studying his astral auric colors. I have explained
these auric colors, and their meanings, in my little book entitled "The
Human Aura."

The human aura is not always in a state of calm phosphorescence, however.
On the contrary, it sometimes manifests great flames, like those of a
fiery furnace, which shoot forth in great tongues, and dart forth suddenly
in certain directions toward the objects attracting them. Under great
emotional excitement the auric flames move around in swift circling
whirlpools, or else swirl away from a centre. Again, it seems to throw
forth tiny glistening sparks of astral vibrations, some of which travel
for great distance.

The clairvoyant vision is also able to discern what is called the "prana
aura" of a person. By this term is indicated that peculiar emanation of
vital force which surrounds the physical body of each and every person. In
fact, many persons of but slight clairvoyant power, who cannot sense the
auric colors, are able to perceive this prana-aura without trouble. It is
sometimes called the "health aura," or "physical aura." It is colorless,
or rather about the shade of clear glass, diamond, or water. It is
streaked with very minute, bristle-like lines. In a state of good health,
these fine lines are stiff like toothbrush bristles; while, in cases of
poor health, these lines droop, curl and present a furlike appearance. It
is sometimes filled with minute sparkling particles, like tiny electric
sparks in rapid vibratory motion.

To the clairvoyant vision the prana-aura appears like the vibrating heated
air arising from a fire, or stove, or from the heated earth in summer. If
the student will close his eyes partially, and will peer through narrowed
eyelids, he will in all probability be able to perceive this prana-aura
surrounding the body of some healthy, vigorous person--particularly if the
person is sitting in a dim light. Looking closely, he will see the
peculiar vibratory motion, like heated air, at a distance of about two
inches from the body of the person. It requires a little practice in order
to acquire the knack of perceiving these vibrations--a little
experimenting in order to get just the right light on the person--but
practice will bring success, and you will be repaid for your trouble.

In the same way, the student may by practice acquire the faculty to
perceiving his own prana-aura. The simplest way to obtain this last
mentioned result is to place your fingers (spread out in fan-shape)
against a black background, in a dim light. Then gaze at the fingers with
narrowed eyelids, and half-closed eyes. After a little practice, you will
see a fine thin line surrounding your fingers on all sides--a
semi-luminous border of prana-aura. In most cases this border of aura is
colorless, but sometimes a very pale yellowish hue is perceived. The
stronger the vital force of the person, the stronger and brighter will
this border of prana-aura appear. The aura surrounding the fingers will
appear very much like the semi-luminous radiance surrounding a gas-flame,
or the flame of a candle, which is familiar to nearly everyone.

Another peculiar phenomenon of the astral plane, perceived by clairvoyants
of a certain degree of development, is that which is known as the
"thought-form." A thought-form is a specialized grouping of astral
substance, crystalized by the strong thought impulses or vibrations of a
person thinking, or manifesting strong emotional excitement. It is
generated in the aura of the person, in the first place, but is then
thrown off or emitted from the atmosphere of the person, and is sent off
into space. A thought-form is really but a strongly manifested thought or
feeling which has taken form in the astral substance. Its power and
duration depend upon the degree of force of the thought or feeling
manifesting it.

These thought-forms differ very materially from one another in form and
general appearance. The most common form is that of a tiny series of
waves, similar to those caused by the dropping of a pebble in a pond of
water. Sometimes the thought-form takes on the appearance of a whirlpool,
rotating around a centre, and moving through space as well. Another form
is like that of the pin-wheel fireworks, swirling away from its centre as
it moves through space. Still another form is that of a whirling ring,
like that emitted from a smokestack of a locomotive, or the mouth of a
smoker--the familiar "ring" of the smoker. Others have the form and
appearance of semi-luminous globes, glowing like a giant opal.

Other thought-forms are emitted in jet-like streams, like steam puffed out
from a tea-kettle. Again, it will appear as a series of short puffs of
steam-like appearance. Again, it will twist along like an eel or snake.
Another time it will twist its way like a corkscrew. At other times it
will appear as a bomb, or series of bombs projected from the aura of the
thinker. Sometimes, as in the case of a vigorous thinker or speaker, these
thought-form bombs will be seen to explode when they reach the aura of the
person addressed or thought of. Other forms appear like nebulous things
resembling an octopus, whose twining tentacles twist around the person to
whom they are directed.

Each thought-form bears the same color that it possessed when generated in
the aura of its creator, though the colors seem to fade with time. Many of
them glow with a dull phosphorescence, instead of bright coloring. The
atmosphere of every person, and every place, is filled with various
thought-forms emanated from the person, or persons who inhabit the place.
Each building has its own distinctive thought-forms, which permeate its
mental atmosphere, and which are clearly discernible by trained
clairvoyant vision.

I here take the liberty of quoting a few paragraphs from my little book
entitled "The Astral World," in which the phenomena of the astral plane
are explained in detail. I reproduce them here in order to show you what
you may see on the astral plane when your clairvoyant vision is
sufficiently developed to function there. The words are addressed to one
who is sensing on the astral, plane.

"Notice that beautiful spiritual blue around that woman's head! And see
that ugly muddy red around that man passing her! Here comes an
intellectual giant--see that beautiful golden yellow around his head, like
a nimbus! But I don't exactly like that shade of red around his body--and
there is too marked an absence of blue in his aura! He lacks harmonious
development. Do you notice those great clouds of semi-luminous substance,
which are slowly floating along?--notice how the colors vary in them.
Those are clouds of thought-vibrations, representing the composite thought
of a multitude of people. Also notice how each body of thought is drawing
to itself little fragments of similar thought-forms and energy. You see
here the tendency of thought-forms to attract others of their kind--how
like the proverbial birds of a feather, they flock together--how thoughts
come home, bringing their friends with them--how each man creates his own
thought atmosphere.

"Speaking of atmospheres, do you notice that each shop we pass has its own
peculiar thought-atmosphere? If you look into the houses on either side of
the street, you will see that the same thing is true. The very street
itself has its own atmosphere, created by the composite thought of those
inhabiting and frequenting it. No! do not pass down that side street--its
astral atmosphere is too depressing, and its colors too horrible and
disgusting for you to witness just now--you might get discouraged and fly
back to your physical body for relief. Look at those thought-forms flying
through the atmosphere! What a variety of form and coloring! Some most
beautiful, the majority quite neutral in tint, and occasionally a fierce,
fiery one tearing its way along toward its mark. Observe those whirling
and swirling thought-forms as they are thrown off from that
business-house. Across the street, notice that great octopus monster of a
thought-form, with its great tentacles striving to wind around persons and
draw them into that flashy dance-hall and dram-shop. A devilish monster
which we would do well to destroy. Turn your concentrated thought upon it,
and will it out of existence--there, that's the right way; watch it sicken
and shrivel! But, alas! more of its kind will come forth from that place."

The above represents the sights common to the advanced occultist who
explores the astral plane either in his astral body, or else by means of
clairvoyant vision. To such a one, these sights are just as natural as
those of the physical plane to the person functioning by ordinary physical
senses. One is as natural as is the other--there is nothing supernatural
about either.

But there are other, and even more wonderful attributes of astral
visioning than that which we have just related. Let us take a general
survey of these, so that you may be familiar with what you hope to see on
the astral plane, and which you will see when you have sufficiently
developed your clairvoyant powers.

What would you think if you could "see through a brick wall?" Well, the
clairvoyant is able to do this. For that matter, the physical X Rays are
able to penetrate through solid substances, and the astral vibrations are
even more subtle than these. It seems strange to hear of this kind of
visioning as purely natural, doesn't it? It smacks strongly of the old
supernatural tales--but it is as simply natural as is the X Ray. The
advanced clairvoyant is able to see through the most solid objects, and
inside of anything, for that matter. The astral senses register the subtle
vibrations of the astral plane, just as the physical eye registers the
ordinary rays of light-energy. You are able to see through solid glass,
with the physical eye, are you not? Well, in the same way the clairvoyant
sees through solid steel or granite. It is all a matter of registering
vibrations of energy--nothing more, and nothing less.

It is in this way that the trained clairvoyant is able to read from closed
books, sealed letters, etc. In the same way, he is able to pierce the
dense soil, and to see far down into the depths of the earth, subject to
certain limitations. Veins of coal, oil, and other substances have been
discovered clairvoyantly in this way. Not every clairvoyant is able to do
this, but the advanced ones have done it. In the same way, the trained
clairvoyant is able to see inside the bodies of sick persons, and to
diagnose their ailments, providing, of course, he is familiar with the
appearance of the organs in health and in disease, and has a sufficient
knowledge of physiology and pathology to interpret what he sees.

An authority on the phenomena of the astral plane has written
entertainingly and correctly regarding this phase of simple clairvoyance,
as follows: "The possession of this extraordinary and scarcely expressible
power, then, must always be borne in mind through all that follows. It
lays every point in the interior of every solid body absolutely open to
the gaze of the seer, just as every point in the interior of a circle lies
open to the gaze of a man looking down upon it. But even this is by no
means all that it gives to its possessor. He sees not only the inside as
well as the outside of every object, but also its astral counterpart.
Every atom and molecule of physical matter has its corresponding astral
atoms and molecules, and the mass which is built up out of these is
clearly visible to the clairvoyant. Usually the astral form of any object
projects somewhat beyond the physical part of it, and thus metals, stones
and other things are seen surrounded by an astral aura.

"It will be seen at once that even in the study of inorganic matter a man
gains immensely by the acquisition of this vision. Not only does he see
the astral part of the object at which he looks, which before was wholly
hidden from him; not only does he see much more of its physical
constitution than he did before, but even what was visible to him before
is now seen much more clearly and truly. * * * Another strange power of
which he may find himself in possession is that of magnifying at will the
minutest physical or astral particle to any desired size, as through a
microscope--though no microscope ever made, or ever likely to be made,
possesses even a thousandth part of this psychic magnifying power. By its
means the hypothetical molecule and atom postulated by science become
visible and living realities to the occult student, and on this closer
examination he finds them to be much more complex in their structure than
the scientific man has yet realized them to be. It also enables him to
follow with the closest attention and the most lively interest all kinds
of electrical, magnetic, and other etheric action; and when some of the
specialists in these branches of science are able to develop the power to
see these things whereof they write so facilely, some very wonderful and
beautiful revelations may be expected.

"This is one of the SIDDIHIS or powers described in the Oriental
books as accruing to the man who devotes himself to spiritual development,
though the name under which it is there mentioned might not be immediately
recognizable. It is referred to as 'the power of making oneself large or
small at will,' and the reason of a description which appears so oddly to
reverse the fact is that in reality the method by which this feat is
performed is precisely that indicated in these ancient books. It is by the
use of temporary visual machinery of inconceivable minuteness that the
world of the infinitely little is so clearly seen; and in the same way (or
rather in the opposite way) it is by enormously increasing the size of the
machinery used that it becomes possible to increase the breadth of one's
view--in the physical sense as well as, let us hope, in the moral--far
beyond anything that science has ever dreamt of as possible for man. So
that the alteration in size is really in the vehicle of the student's
consciousness, and not in anything outside of himself; and the old
Oriental books have, after all, put the case more accurately than have we.
I have indicated, though only in the roughest outlines, what a trained
student, possessed of full astral vision, would see in the immensely wider
world to which that vision introduced him; but I have said nothing of the
stupendous change in his mental attitude which comes from the experimental
certainty regarding matters of paramount importance. The difference
between even the profoundest intellectual conviction, and the precise
knowledge gained by direct personal experience, must be felt in order to
be appreciated."

Now, here at this place, I wish to call the attention of the student to
the fact that while the above stated, phenomena strictly belong to the
class of "simple clairvoyance," rather than to "space clairvoyance," or
"time clairvoyance" respectively, nevertheless the same phenomena may be
manifested in connection with that of these other classes of clairvoyance.
For instance, in space clairvoyance the trained clairvoyant is able not
only to perceive things happening at points far distant, but may also (if
highly developed psychically) be able to perceive the details just
mentioned as well as if he were at that distant point in person. Likewise,
in time clairvoyance, the clairvoyant may exercise the power of magnifying
vision regarding the object far distant in time, just as if he were living
in that time. So here as elsewhere we find the different classes of
phenomena shading and blending into each other. At the best,
classifications are useful principally for convenience in intellectual
consideration and reasoning.

In the same way, the clairvoyant may manifest the above mentioned forms of
astral sensing in cases when the astral vision has been awakened by
psychometry, or by crystal gazing, as well as in those cases in which the
condition has been brought about through meditation, or similar methods.

I would also call the attention of the student to the fact that in the
above description of the phenomena of simple clairvoyance I have made no
mention of the sights of the astral plane which often become visible to
the clairvoyant, and which have to do with astral bodies, astral shells,
the disembodied souls of those who have passed on to other planes of
existence, etc. I shall take up these matters in other parts of this
course, and shall not dwell upon them in this place. But, I wish you to
remember that the same power which enables you to sense other objects by
means of the astral scenes, is the same that is called into operation in
the cases to which I have just referred.

The astral plane is a wonderful plane or field of being, containing many
strange and wonderful beings and things. The person living on the physical
plane may visit the astral plane in the astral body; and, again, he may
perceive the happenings and scenes of that plane by means of the awakened
and developed astral senses. Some clairvoyants find it easy to function in
one way, and some in another. It is reserved for the scientifically
developed clairvoyant to manifest the well-rounded power to perceive the
phenomena of the astral plane in its wonderful entirety.

Finally, you will see by reference to other chapters of this book, that
one may manifest simple clairvoyant powers (as well as the more
complicated ones of time and space clairvoyance) not only in the ordinary
waking state, but also in the state of dreams. In fact, some of the most
striking psychic phenomena are manifested when the seer is in the dream
state. As we proceed, you will find that every phase of the great subject
will fit into its place, and will be found to blend with every other
phase. There will be found a logical harmony and unity of thought
pervading the whole subject. But we must use single bricks and stones as
we build--it is only in the completed structure that we may perceive the
harmonious unity.




LESSON X.

CLAIRVOYANCE OF DISTANT SCENES.


Let us now consider the phenomena of the second class of clairvoyance,
namely, Clairvoyance in Space.

In space clairvoyance the clairvoyant person senses scenes and events
removed in space from the observer--that is to say, scenes and events
situated outside of the range of the physical vision of the clairvoyant.
In this class also is included certain phenomena in which the clairvoyant
vision is able to discern things that may be concealed or obscured by
intervening material objects. Some of the many different forms and phases
of space clairvoyance are illustrated by the following examples, all taken
from the best sources.

Bushnell relates the following well-known case of space clairvoyance:
"Capt. Yount, of Napa Valley, California, one midwinter's night had a
dream in which he saw what appeared to be a company of emigrants arrested
by the snows of the mountains, and perishing rapidly by cold and hunger.
He noted the very cast of the scenery, marked by a huge, perpendicular
front of white-rock cliff; he saw the men cutting off what appeared to be
tree-tops rising out of deep gulfs of snow; he distinguished the very
features of the persons, and their look of peculiar distress. He awoke
profoundly impressed by the distinctness and apparent reality of the
dream. He at length fell asleep, and dreamed exactly the same dream over
again. In the morning he could not expel it from his mind. Falling in
shortly after with an old hunter comrade, he told his story, and was only
the more deeply impressed by him recognizing without hesitation the
scenery of the dream. This comrade came over the Sierra by the Carson
Valley Pass, and declared that a spot in the Pass exactly answered his
description.

"By this the unsophistical patriarch was decided. He immediately collected
a company of men, with mules and blankets and all necessary provisions.
The neighbors were laughing meantime at his credulity. 'No matter,' he
said, 'I am able to do this, and I will, for I verily believe that the
fact is according to my dream.' The men were sent into the mountains one
hundred and fifty miles distant, direct to the Carson Valley Pass. And
there they found the company exactly in the condition of the dream, and
brought in the remnant alive."

In connection with this case, some leading, occultists are of the opinion
that the thought-waves from the minds of the distressed lost persons
reached Capt. Yount in his sleep, and awakened his subconscious attention.
Having natural clairvoyant power, though previously unaware of it, he
naturally directed his astral vision to the source of the mental currents,
and perceived clairvoyantly the scene described in the story. Not having
any acquaintance with any of the lost party, it was only by reason of the
mental currents of distress so sent out that his attention was attracted.
This is a very interesting case, because several psychic factors are
involved in it, as I have just said.

In the following case, there is found a connecting link of acquaintance
with a person playing a prominent part in the scene, although there was no
conscious appeal to the clairvoyant, nor conscious interest on her part
regarding the case. The story is well-known, and appears in the
Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research. It runs as follows:

Mrs. Broughton awoke one night in 1844, and roused her husband, telling
him that something dreadful had happened in France. He begged her to go
asleep again, and not trouble him. She assured him that she was not asleep
when she saw what she insisted on telling him--what she saw in fact. She
saw, first, a carriage accident, or rather, the scene of such an accident
which had occurred a few moments before. What she saw was the result of
the accident--a broken carriage, a crowd collected, a figure gently raised
and carried into the nearest house, then a figure lying on a bed, which
she recognized as the Duke of Orleans. Gradually friends collected around
the bed--among them several members of the French royal family--the queen,
then the king, all silently, tearfully, watching the evidently dying duke.
One man (she could see his back, but did not know who he was) was a
doctor. He stood bending over the duke, feeling his pulse, with his watch
in the other hand. And then all passed away, and she saw no more. "As
soon as it was daylight she wrote down in her journal all that she had
seen. It was before the days of the telegraph, and two or more days passed
before the newspapers announced 'The Death of the Duke of Orleans.'
Visiting Paris a short time afterwards, she saw and recognized the place
of the accident, and received the explanation of her impression. The
doctor who attended the dying duke was an old friend of hers, and as he
watched by the bed his mind had been constantly occupied with her and her
family."

In many cases of clairvoyance of this kind, there is found to exist a
strong connecting link of mutual interest or affection, over which flows
the strong attention-arousing force of need or distress, which calls into
operation the clairvoyant visioning.

In other cases there seems to be lacking any connecting link, although,
even in such cases there may be a subconscious link connecting the
clairvoyant with the scene or event. An interesting example of this last
mentioned phase is that related by W.T. Stead, the English editor and
author, as having happened to himself. Mr. Stead's recital follows:

"I got into bed and was not able to go to sleep. I shut my eyes and waited
for sleep to come; instead of sleep, however, there came to me a
succession of curiously vivid clairvoyant pictures. There was no light in
the room, and it was perfectly dark; I had my eyes shut also. But,
notwithstanding the darkness, I suddenly was conscious of looking at a
scene of singular beauty. It was as if I saw a living miniature about the
size of a magic-lantern slide. At this moment I can recall the scene as if
I saw it again. It was a seaside piece. The moon was shining upon the
water, which rippled slowly on to the beach. Right before me a long mole
ran into the water. On either side of the mole irregular rocks stood up
above the sea-level. On the shore stood several houses, square and rude,
which resembled nothing that I had ever seen in house architecture. No one
was stirring, but the moon was there and the sea and the gleam of the
moonlight on the rippling waters, just as if I had been looking on the
actual scene. It was so beautiful that I remember thinking that if it
continued I should be so interested in looking at it that I should never
go asleep. I was wide awake, and at the same time that I saw the scene I
distinctly heard the dripping of the rain outside the window. Then,
suddenly without any apparent object or reason, the scene changed.

"The moonlight sea vanished, and in us place I was looking right into the
interior of a reading-room. It seemed as if it had been used as a
school-room in the daytime, and was employed as a reading-room in the
evening. I remember seeing one reader who had a curious resemblance to Tim
Harrington, although it was not he, hold up a magazine or book in his hand
and laugh. It was not a picture--it was there. The scene was just as if
you were looking through an opera glass; you saw the play of the muscles,
the gleaming of the eye, every movement of the unknown persons in the
unnamed place into which you were gazing. I saw all that without opening
my eyes, nor did my eyes have anything to do with it. You see such things
as these as if it were with another sense which is more inside your head
than in your eyes. The pictures were apropos of nothing; they had been
suggested by nothing I had been reading or talking of; they simply came as
if I had been able to look through a glass at what was occurring somewhere
else in the world. I had my peep, and then it passed."

An interesting case of space clairvoyance is that related of Swedenborg,
on the best authority. The story runs that in the latter part of
September, 1759, at four o'clock one Saturday afternoon, Swedenborg
arrived home from England, and disembarked at the town of Gothenburg. A
friend, Mr. W. Castel, met him and invited him to dinner, at which meal
there were fifteen persons gathered around the table in honor of the
guest. At six o'clock, Swedenborg went out a few minutes, returning to the
table shortly thereafter, looking pale and excited. When questioned by the
guests he replied that there was a fire at Stockholm, two hundred miles
distant, and that the fire was steadily spreading. He grew very restless,
and frequently left the room. He said that the house of one of his
friends, whose name he mentioned, was already in ashes, and that his own
was in danger. At eight o'clock, after he had been out again, he returned
crying out cheerfully, "Thank heaven! the fire is out, the third door
from my house!" The news of the strange happening greatly excited the
people of the town, and the city officials made inquiry regarding it.
Swedenborg was summoned before the authorities, and requested to relate in
detail what he had seen. Answering the questions put to him, he told when
and how the fire started; how it had begun; how, when and where it had
stopped; the time it had lasted; the number of houses destroyed or
damaged, and the number of persons injured. On the following Monday
morning a courier arrived from Stockholm, bringing news of the fire,
having left the town while it was still burning. On the next day after,
Tuesday morning, another courier arrived at the city hall with a full
report of the fire, which corresponded precisely with the vision of
Swedenborg. The fire had stopped precisely at eight o'clock, the very
minute that Swedenborg had so announced it to the company.

A similar case is related by Stead, having been told to him by the wife of
a Dean in the Episcopal Church. He relates it as follows: "I was staying
in Virginia, some hundred miles away from home, when one morning about
eleven o'clock I felt an overpowering sleepiness, which drowsiness was
quite unusual, and which caused me to lie down. In my sleep I saw quite
distinctly my home in Richmond in flames. The fire had broken out in one
wing of the house, which I saw with dismay was where I kept all my best
dresses. The people were all trying to check the flames, but it was no
use. My husband was there, walking about before the burning house,
carrying a portrait in his hand. Everything was quite clear and distinct,
exactly as if I had actually been present and seen everything. After a
time, I woke up, and going down stairs told my friends the strange dream I
had had. They laughed at me, and made such game of my vision that I did my
best to think no more about it. I was traveling about, a day or two
passed, and when Sunday came I found myself in a church where some
relatives were worshipping. When I entered the pew they looked very
strange, and as soon as the service was over I asked them what was the
matter. 'Don't be alarmed,' they said, 'there is nothing serious.' Then
they handed me a post-card from my husband which simply said, 'House
burned out; covered by insurance.' The day was the date upon which my
dream occurred. I hastened home, and then I learned that everything had
happened exactly as I had seen it. The fire had broken out in the wing I
had seen blazing. My clothes were all burned, and the oddest thing about
it was that my husband, having rescued a favorite picture from the burning
building, had carried it about among the crowd for some time before he
could find a place in which to put it safely."

Another case, related by Stead, the same authority, runs as follows: "The
father of a son who had sailed on the 'Strathmore,' an emigrant ship
outbound from the Clyde saw one night the ship foundering amid the waves,
and saw that his son, with some others, had escaped safely to a desert
island near which the wreck had taken place. He was so much impressed by
this vision that he wrote to the owner of the 'Strathmore' telling him
what he had seen. His information was scouted; but after a while the
'Strathmore' became overdue, and the owner became uneasy. Day followed
day, and still no tidings of the missing ship. Then like Pharaoh's butler,
the owner remembered his sins one day, and hunted up the letter describing
the vision. It supplied at least a theory to account for the ship's
disappearance. All outward-bound ships were requested to look out for any
survivors on the island indicated in the vision. These orders were obeyed,
and the survivors of the 'Strathmore' were found exactly where the father
had seen them."

The Society for Psychical Research mentions another interesting case, as
follows: "Dr. Golinski, a physician of Kremeutchug, Russia, was taking an
after-dinner nap in the afternoon, about half-past three o'clock. He had a
vision in which he saw himself called out on a professional visit, which
took him to a little room with dark hangings. To the right of the door he
saw a chest of drawers, upon which rested a little paraffine lamp of
special pattern, different from anything he had ever seen before. On the
left of the door, he saw a woman suffering from a severe hemorrhage. He
then saw himself giving her professional treatment. Then he awoke,
suddenly, and saw that it was just half-past four o'clock. Within ten
minutes after he awoke, he was called out on a professional visit, and on
entering the bedroom he saw all the details that had appeared to him in
his vision. There was the chest of drawers--there was the peculiar
lamp--there was the woman on the bed, suffering from the hemorrhage. Upon
inquiry, he found that she had grown worse between three and four o'clock,
and had anxiously desired that he come to her about that time, finally
dispatching a messenger for him at half-past four, the moment at which he
awoke."

Another, and a most peculiar, phase of space clairvoyance is that in which
certain persons so awaken the astral senses of other persons that these
persons perceive the first person--usually in the form of seemingly seeing
the person present in the immediate vicinity, just as one would see a
ghostly visitor. In some cases there is manifested double-clairvoyance,
both persons visioning clairvoyantly; in other cases, only the person
"visited" astrally senses the occurrence. The following cases illustrate
this form of space clairvoyance.

W.T. Stead relates the case of a lady well known to him, who spontaneously
developed the power of awakening astral perception in others. She seemed
to "materialize" in their presence. Her power in this direction became a
source of considerable anxiety and worry to her friends to whom she would
pay unexpected and involuntary visits, frightening them out of their wits
by the appearance of her "ghost." They naturally thought that she had died
suddenly and had appeared to them in ghostly form. The lady, her self,
was totally unconscious of the appearance, though she admitted that at or
about the times of the appearances she had been thinking of her friends
whom she visited astrally.

The German writer, Jung Stilling, mentions the case of a man of good
character who had developed power of this kind, but also was conscious of
his visits. He exerted the power consciously by an effort of will, it
seems. At one time he was consulted by the wife of a sea captain whose
husband was on a long voyage to Europe and Asia (sailing from America).
His ship was long overdue, and his wife was quite worried about him. She
consulted the gentleman in question, and he promised to do what he could
for her. Leaving the room he threw himself on a couch and was seen by the
lady (who peered through the half-opened door) to be in a state of
semi-trance. Finally he returned and told her that he had visited her
husband in a coffee-house in London, and gave her husband's reasons for
not writing, adding that her husband would soon return to America. When
her husband returned several months later, the wife asked him about the
matter. He informed her that the clairvoyant's report was correct in every
particular. Upon being introduced to the clairvoyant, the captain
manifested great surprise, saying that he had met the man in question on a
certain day in a coffee-house in London, and that the man had told him
that his wife was worried about him, and that he had told the man that he
had been prevented from writing for several reasons, and that he was on
the eve of beginning his return voyage to America. He added that when he
looked for the man a few moments afterwards, the stranger had apparently
lost himself in the crowd, disappeared and was seen no more by him.

The Society for Psychical Research gives prominence to the celebrated case
of the member of the London Stock Exchange, whose identity it conceals
under the initials "S.H.B.," who possessed this power of voluntary
awakening of astral sight in others by means of his "appearance" to them.
The man relates his experience to the Society as follows: "One Sunday
night in November, 1881, I was in Kildare Gardens, when I willed very
strongly that I would visit in the spirit two lady friends, the Misses X.,
who were living three miles off, in Hogarth Road. I willed that I should
do this at one o'clock in the morning, and having willed it, I went to
sleep. Next Thursday, when I first met my friends, the elder lady told me
that she woke up and saw my apparition advancing to her bedside. She
screamed and woke her sisters, who also saw me." (The report includes the
signed statement of the ladies, giving the time of the appearance, and the
details thereof.)

"Again, on December 1, 1882, I was at Southall. At half-past nine I sat
down to endeavor to fix my mind so strongly upon the interior of a house
at Kew, where Miss V. and her sister lived, that I seemed to be actually
in the house. I was conscious, but was in a kind of mesmeric sleep. When
I went to bed that night, I willed to be in the front bedroom of that
house at Kew at twelve; and to make my presence felt by the inmates. Next
day I went to Kew. Miss V.'s married sister told me, without any prompting
from me, that she had seen me in the passage going from one room to
another at half-past nine o'clock, and that at twelve, when she was wide
awake, she saw me come to the front bedroom, where she slept, and take her
hair, which is very long, into my hand. She said I then took her hand, and
gazed into the palm intently. She said, 'You need not look at the lines,
for I never have any trouble.' She then woke her sister. When Mrs. L. told
me this, I took out the entry that I had made the previous night and read
it to her. Mrs. L. is quite sure she was not dreaming. She had only seen
me once before, two years previously. Again, on March 22, 1884, I wrote to
Mr. Gurney, of the Psychical Research Society, telling him that I was
going to make my presence felt by Miss V., at 44 Norland Square, at
midnight. Ten days afterwards, I saw Miss V., when she voluntarily told me
that on Saturday at midnight, she distinctly saw me, when she was quite
wide awake."

The records of the psychic researchers are filled with numerous accounts
of cases in which similar astral projections have occurred when the person
was on his or her death-bed, but was still alive. It would seem that under
such circumstances the astral senses are very much freer from the
interference of the physical senses, and tend to manifest very strongly
in the form of appearances to persons in whom the dying person is attached
by the ties of affection. Many who read this course have known of cases of
this kind, for they are of quite frequent occurrence.

The student will notice that in the majority of the cases cited in this
chapter the clairvoyant has been in a state of sleep, or semi-sleep--often
in a dream condition. But you must not jump to the conclusion that this
condition is always necessary for the manifestation of this phenomenon. On
the contrary, the advanced and well developed clairvoyants usually assume
merely a condition of deep reverie or meditation, shutting out the sounds
and thoughts of the physical plane, so as to be able to function better on
the astral plane.

The reason that so many recorded cases have occurred when the clairvoyant
person was asleep, and the vision appeared as a dream, is simply because
in such a condition the physical senses of the person are stilled and at
rest, and there is less likelihood of interference from them, and a better
opportunity for the astral senses to function effectively. It is like the
familiar cases in which one becomes so wrapped up in viewing a beautiful
work of art, or in listening to a beautiful musical rendition, that he or
she forgets all about the sights and sounds of the world outside. One
sometimes gets into this same condition when reading an interesting book,
or when witnessing an interesting play. When the psychic powers are
concentrated upon any one channel of vision, the others fail to register
a clear impression. The same rule holds good on the astral plane, as on
the physical.

There are certain psychic conditions which are especially conducive to the
manifestation of clairvoyant phenomena, as all students of the subject
know very well. These conditions are somewhat hard to induce, at least
until the clairvoyant has had considerable experience and practice. But,
in the state of sleep, the person induces the desired conditions, in many
cases, though he is not consciously doing so. As might naturally be
expected, therefore, the majority of the recorded cases of clairvoyance
have occurred when the clairvoyant person has been asleep.

I should also state, once more, that in many cases in which the
clairvoyant has witnessed the "appearance" of another person, as in the
cases such as I have just mentioned, there is always the possibility of
the person having actually appeared in his astral body, unconsciously to
himself of course. No one but a skilled occultist is able to distinguish
between cases of this kind. The line between this class of clairvoyance
and astral appearance is very thin, and, in fact, the two classes of
phenomena shade and blend into each other. In reality, when one gets down
to bottom principles, there is very little difference between the actual
appearance in the astral body, and the strong projection of one's presence
by means of will, conscious or unconscious, along the lines of awakening
the clairvoyant vision of others. To attempt to explain the slight points
of difference here, would only involve the student in a mass of technical
description which would tend to confuse, rather than to enlighten
him--from this I refrain.




LESSON XI.

CLAIRVOYANCE OF THE PAST


The third great class of clairvoyant phenomena, known as Time
Clairvoyance, is divided into two sub-classes, as follows: (1) Past-Time
Clairvoyance; and (2) Future-Time Clairvoyance. The characteristics of
each of these sub-classes is indicated by its name.

Past-Time Clairvoyance, as indicated by the name, is that class of
clairvoyant phenomena which is concerned with the perception of facts,
events and happenings of past time. Whether the happening is that of five
minutes ago, or of five thousand years ago, the principles involved are
precisely the same. One is no more or less wonderful than is the other.

Many students confess themselves perplexed when they are first confronted
with this class of phenomena. While they find it comparatively easy to see
how by astral vision the clairvoyant is able to sense events happening at
that moment, though thousands of miles away from the observer, they cannot
at first understand how one can "see" a thing no longer in existence, but
which disappeared from sight thousands of years ago. Naturally, they ask
to be informed how this is possible, before proceeding to develop the
faculty itself. Believing that this question is now being asked by you,
the student of these lessons, I shall pause for a few moments and show you
"just how" this wonderful thing becomes possible to the clairvoyant.

In the first place, it would undoubtedly be impossible to perceive a
thing, even by astral vision, if it had entirely disappeared at some time
in the past--this would be beyond all natural powers, astral as well as
physical. But, as a matter of fact, the things of the past have not
entirely disappeared, but, on the contrary, while having disappeared on
the physical plane they still exist on the astral plane. I shall endeavor
to explain this wonderful fact of nature to you in plain terms, although
it belongs to one of the most mysterious classes of the occult facts of
the universe.

In the occult teachings we find many references to "the Akashic Records,"
or what is sometimes called "the records of the Astral Light." Without
going into technical occult definitions and explanations, I will say to
you that the gist of this occult teaching is that in that high form of the
universal substance which is called the Universal Ether there is found to
be recorded all the happenings of the entire World Cycle of which the
present time is a part. All that has happened from the very beginning of
this World Cycle, millions of years ago, is preserved on these astral
records, and may be read by the advanced clairvoyant or other person
possessing occult powers of this kind. These records perish only with the
termination of a World Cycle, which will not happen for millions of years
yet to come.

To those who cannot accept the reasonableness of this occult fact, I would
say that there are analogies to be found on other planes of natural
manifestation. For instance, as astronomy teaches us, a star may be
blotted out of existence, and yet its light will persist long after
(perhaps until the end of world-time) traveling along at the rate of
186,000 miles each second. The light that we now see coming from the
distant stars has left those stars many years ago--in some cases thousands
of years ago. We see them not as they are now, but as they were at the
time the ray of light left them, many years ago; The astronomers inform us
that if one of these stars had been
[*Transcribers Note: Text missing from original]
sands) of years ago, we would still see it as in actual existence. In
fact, it is believed that some of these stars which we see twinkling at
night have actually been blotted out hundreds of years ago. We will not be
aware of this fact until the light rays suddenly cease reaching us, after
their journey of billions of miles and hundreds of years. A star blotted
out of existence today would be seen by our children, and children's
children.

The heat from a stove will be felt in a room long after the stove has been
removed from it. A room will long contain the odor of something that has
been removed from it. It is said that in one of the old mosques of Persia
there may be perceived the faint odor of the musk that was exposed there
hundreds of years ago--the very walls are saturated with the pungent odor.
Again, is it not wonderful that our memories preserve the images of the
sounds and forms which were placed there perhaps fifty years and more
ago? How do these memory images survive and exist? Though we may have
thought of the past thing for half a lifetime, yet, suddenly its image
flashes into our consciousness. Surely this is as wonderful as the Akashic
Records, though its "commonness" makes it lose its wonderful appearance to
us.

Camille Flammarion, the eminent French astronomer, in a book written over
twenty-five years ago, and which is now out of print, I believe, pictured
a possible condition of affairs in which a disembodied soul would be able
to perceive events that happened in the past, by simply taking a position
in space in which he would be able to catch the light-waves that emanated
from a distant planet at that particular time in the past the happenings
of which he wanted to perceive. The little book was called "Lumen"--I
advise you to read it, if you can find it in your public libraries.

Another writer has written somewhat along the same lines. I herewith give
you a quotation from him, that you may get the idea he wishes to
express--it will help you in your conception of the Akashic Records. He
says: "When we see anything, whether it be the book we hold in our hands,
or a star millions of miles away, we do so by means of a vibration in the
ether, commonly called a ray of light, which passes from the object seen
to our eyes. Now the speed with which this vibration passes is so
great--about 186,000 miles in a second--that when we are considering any
object in our own world we may regard it as practically instantaneous.
When, however, we come to deal with interplanetary distances we have to
take the speed of light into consideration, for an appreciable period is
occupied in traversing these vast spaces. For example, it takes eight
minutes and a quarter for light to travel to us from the sun, so that when
we look at the solar orb we see it by means of a ray of light which left
it more than eight minutes ago. From this follows a very curious result.
The ray of light by which we see the sun can obviously report to us only
the state of affairs' which existed in that luminary when it started on
its journey, and would not be in the least affected by anything that
happened after it left; so that we really see the sun not as it is, but as
it was eight minutes ago. That is to say that if anything important took
place in the sun--the formation of a new sun-spot, for instance--an
astronomer who was watching the orb through his telescope at the time
would be unaware of the incident while it was happening, since the ray of
light bearing the news would not reach him until more than eight minutes
later.

"The difference is more striking when we consider the fixed stars, because
in their case the distances are so enormously greater. The pole star, for
example, is so far off that light, traveling at the inconceivable speed
above mentioned, takes a little more than fifty years to reach our eyes;
and from that follows the strange but inevitable inference that we see the
pole star not as or where it is at this moment, but as and where it was
fifty years ago. Nay, if tomorrow some cosmic catastrophe were to shatter
the pole star into fragments, we should still see it peacefully shining in
the sky all the rest of our lives; our children would grow up to
middle-age and gather their children about them in turn before the news of
that tremendous accident reached any terrestial eye. In the same way there
are other stars so far distant that light takes thousands of years to
travel from them to us, and with reference to their condition our
information is therefore thousands of years behind time. Now carry the
argument a step farther. Suppose that we were able to place a man at the
distance of 186,000 miles from the earth, and yet to endow him with the
wonderful faculty of being able from that distance to see what was
happening here as clearly as though he were still close beside us. It is
evident that a man so placed would see everything a second after the time
it really happened, and so at the present moment he would be seeing what
happened a second ago. Double that distance, and he would be two seconds
behind time, and so on; remove him to the distance of the sun (still
allowing him to preserve the same mysterious power of sight) and he would
look down and watch you doing not what you are doing now, but what you
were doing eight minutes and a quarter ago. Carry him to the pole star,
and he would see passing before his eyes the events of fifty years ago; he
would be watching the childish gambols of those who at the same moment
were really middle-aged men. Marvellous as this may sound, it is
literally and scientifically true, and cannot be denied."

Flammarion, in his story, called "Lumen," makes his spirit hero pass at
will along the ray of light from the earth, seeing the things of different
eras of earth-time. He even made him travel backward along that ray, thus
seeing the happenings in reverse order, as in a moving picture running
backward. This story is of the greatest interest to the occultist, for
while the Akashic Records are not the same as the light records, yet the
analogy is so marked in many ways that the occultist sees here another
exemplification of the old occult axiom that "as above, so below; as
below, so above."

I take the liberty of quoting here from my little book, "The Astral
World," in order to give you some further idea of the nature of these
records in the Astral Light. The reader is supposed to be travelling in
his astral body, having the phenomena of the astral pointed out to him by
a competent occultist acting as his guide. The occultist-guide says to the
student: "Changing our vibrations, we find ourselves entering a strange
region, the nature of which you at first fail to discern. Pausing a moment
until your astral vision becomes attuned to the peculiar vibrations of
this region, you will find that you are becoming gradually aware of what
may be called an immense picture gallery, spreading out in all directions,
and apparently bearing a direct relation to every point of space on the
surface of the earth. At first, you find it difficult to decipher the
meaning of this great array of pictures. The trouble arises from the fact
that they are arranged not one after the other in sequence on a flat
plane; but rather in sequence, one after another, in a peculiar order
which may be called the order of 'X-ness in space,' because it is neither
the dimension of length, breadth, or depth--it is practically the order of
the fourth dimension in space, which cannot be described in terms of
ordinary spatial dimension. Again, you find upon closely examining the
pictures that they are very minute--practically microscopic in size--and
require the use of the peculiar magnifying power of astral vision to bring
them up to a size capable of being recognized by your faculty of visual
recognition.

"The astral vision, when developed, is capable of magnifying any object,
material or astral, to an enormous degree--for instance, the trained
occultist is able to perceive the whirling atoms and corpuscles of matter,
by means of this peculiarity of astral vision. Likewise, he is able to
plainly perceive many fine vibrations of light which are invisible to the
ordinary sight. In fact, the peculiar Astral Light which pervades this
region is due to the power of the astral vision to perceive and register
these fine vibrations of light. Bring this power of magnifying into
operation, and you will see that each of the little points and details of
the great world picture so spread before you in the Astral Light is really
a complete scene of a certain place on earth, at a certain period in the
history of the earth. It resembles one of the small views in a series of
moving pictures--a single view of a roll-film. It is fixed, and not in
motion, and yet we can move forward along the fourth dimension, and thus
obtain a moving picture of the history of any point on the surface of the
earth, or even combine the various points into a large moving picture, in
the same way. Let us prove this by actual experiment. Close your eyes for
a moment, while we travel back in time (so to speak) along the series of
these astral records--for, indeed, they travel back to the beginning of
the history of the earth. Now open your eyes! Looking around you, you
perceive the pictured representation of strange scenes filled with persons
wearing a peculiar garb--but all is still, no life, no motion.

"Now, let us move forward in time, at much higher rate than that in which
the astral views were registered. You now see flying before you the great
movement of life on a certain point of space, in a far distant age. From
birth to death you see the life of these strange people, all in the space
of a few moments. Great battles are fought, and cities rise before your
eyes, all in a great moving picture flying at a tremendous speed. Now
stop, and then let us move backward in time, still gazing at the moving
pictures. You see a strange sight, like that of 'reversing the film' in a
moving picture. You see everything moving backward--cities crumbling into
nothingness, men arising from their graves, and growing younger each
second until they are finally born as babes--everything moving backward in
time, instead of forward. You can thus witness any great historical event,
or follow the career of any great personage from birth to death--or
backward. You will notice, moreover, that everything is semi-transparent,
and that accordingly you can see the picture of what is going on inside of
buildings as well as outside of them. Nothing escapes the Astral Light
Records. Nothing can be concealed from it. By traveling to any point in
time, on the fourth dimension, you may begin at that point, and see a
moving picture of the history of any part of the earth from that time to
the present--or you may reverse the sequence by travelling backward, as we
have seen. You may also travel in the Astral, on ordinary space
dimensions, and thus see what happened simultaneously all over the earth,
at any special moment of past-time, if you wish."

Now, I do not for a moment wish you to understand that the above
experience is possible to every clairvoyant who is able to sense past-time
events and happenings. On the contrary, the above experience is possible
only to the advanced occultist, or to the student whom he may take with
him on an astral trip, in the astral body. The clairvoyant merely catches
glimpses of certain phases and fields of the great astral record region or
state. For that matter, the ordinary clairvoyant merely sees a reflection
of the true Astral-Light pictures--a reflection similar to that of a
landscape reflected in a pond. Moreover, this reflection may be (and
frequently is) disturbed as if by the ripples and waves of the pond in
which the landscape is reflected. But, still, even the ordinary
clairvoyant is able to secure results which are wonderful enough in all
truth, and which far transcend the power of the person functioning on the
physical plane alone.

Past-time clairvoyance is frequently induced by means of psychometry, in
which the clairvoyant is able to have "the loose end" to unwind the ball
of time. But, still, in some cases the clairvoyant is able to get en
rapport with the astral records of past-time by the ordinary methods of
meditation, etc. The main obstacle in the last mentioned case is the
difficulty of coming in contact with the exact period of past-time sought
for--in psychometry, the vibrations of the "associated object" supplies
the missing-link.

Lacking the "associated object," the clairvoyant may obtain the link by
bringing into the imagination some associated scene of that
time--something else that happened about the same time. All that is needed
is to get hold of something associated in space or in time with the sought
for scene. All that is needed is the "loose end" of association. Sometimes
the clairvoyant senses some past-time experience, the place and time of
which is unknown to him. In such cases, it is necessary for him to get
hold of some "loose end" by which he may work out the solution. For
instance, the picture of a certain building or personage, or historical
happening, may give the key to the mystery.

In very high forms of past-time clairvoyance, the clairvoyant is able not
only to perceive the actual happenings of the past, but also to actually
sense the thought and feelings of the actors therein--for these, too, are
recorded on the astral plane. In other cases, the clairvoyant person is
able to picture scenes and happenings relating to his past incarnations,
even though he is not able to sense other past-time events and scenes.
But, here again, many good past-time clairvoyants are not able to catch
these glimpses of their own past lives, though able to perceive those of
other persons. All these variations are due to certain technical
differences into which I cannot go into detail at this place. Again some
persons are able to perceive events that have happened to persons present
before them, but are not able to contact past-time events in the ordinary
way. There are a thousand-and-one variations in clairvoyant work. Only the
highly advanced occultist is master of all of them. But, still every one
may develop himself or herself, from humble beginnings.

In concluding this lesson, I wish to call your attention to the following
advice from a man well advanced in the knowledge of the astral plane. He
says: "It would be well for all students to bear in mind that occultism is
the apotheosis of common-sense, and that every vision that comes to them
is not necessarily a picture from the Akashic Records, nor every
experience a revelation from on high. It is far better to err on the side
of healthy skepticism, than of over-credulity, and it is an admirable
rule never to hunt about for an occult explanation of anything when a
plain and obvious physical one is available. Our duty is to endeaveor to
keep our balance always, and never to lose our self-control, but to take a
reasonable, common-sense view of whatever may happen to us, so that we may
be wiser occultists, and more useful helpers than we have ever been
before.

"We find examples of all degrees of the power to see into this 'memory of
nature,' from the trained man who can consult the records for himself at
will, down to the person who gets nothing but occasional vague glimpses,
or has perhaps had only once such glimpse. But even the man who possesses
this faculty only partially and occasionally still finds it of the deepest
interest. The psychometer, who needs an object physically connected with
the past in order to bring it all into life again around him; and the
crystal-gazer who can sometimes direct his less certain astral telescope
to some historic scene of long ago, may both derive the greatest enjoyment
from the exercise of their respective gifts, even though they may not
always understand exactly how their results are obtained, and may not have
them fully under control under all circumstances.

"In many cases of the lower manifestations of these powers we find that
they are exercised unconsciously. Many a crystal-gazer watches scenes from
the past without being able to distinguish them from visions of the
present. And many a vaguely-psychic person finds pictures constantly
arising before his eyes, without ever realizing that he is in effect
psychometrizing the various objects around him, as he happens to touch
them or stand near them. An interesting variant of this class of psychics
is the man who is able to psychometrize persons only, and not inanimate
objects as is more usual. In most cases this faculty shows itself
erratically, so that such a psychic will, when introduced to a stranger,
often see in a flash some prominent event in that stranger's earlier life,
but on similar occasions will receive no special impression. More rarely
we meet with someone who gets detailed visions of the past life of nearly
everyone whom he encounters. It may easily happen, moreover, that a person
may see a picture of the past without recognizing it as such, unless there
happens to be in it something which attracts special attention, such as a
figure in armor, or in antique costume. Its probable, therefore, that
occasional glimpses of these astral reflections of the akashic records are
commoner than the published accounts would lead us to believe."

I would say to my students, make haste slowly. Do not try to rush
development too rapidly. Perfect and develop yourself in one line of
psychic power, before seeking another. Take things cooly, and do not lose
your head because you happen to achieve some wonderful phenomena. Do not
become conceited and vain-glorious. And, finally, do not prostitute your
powers to ignoble ends, and make a cheap show of them. By cheapening and
prostituting the higher psychic powers, the student frequently ends by
losing them altogether. Moderation in all things is the safe policy. And
it always is well for the occultist to resist temptation to use his powers
for unworthy, sensational, or purely selfish purposes.




LESSON XII.

CLAIRVOYANCE OF THE FUTURE


Future-Time Clairvoyance, as indicated by its name, is that class of
clairvoyant phenomena which is concerned with the perception of facts,
events and happenings of future time. In this class of clairvoyant
phenomena naturally fall all genuine cases of prophecy, prevision,
foretelling, second-sight, etc. History, theological and secular, is
filled with instances of the foretelling of the future by prophets, wise
men, and others. By many, such powers are generally regarded as
supernatural or divine. Without wishing to combat such theories and
beliefs, I would say that the advanced occultists account for all such
phenomena under the general laws of clairvoyance.

But while the phenomena itself is very well known, and is accepted as
genuine in even many cases in which past-time clairvoyance is doubted,
still it is even more difficult to explain than is past-time clairvoyance
based on the Akashic Records or the Astral Light. To the person not well
versed in occult knowledge, and esoteric principles, it is deemed
impossible to intelligently account for the perception of an event before
it has actually happened--perhaps years before its actual happening. While
I cannot hope to make this matter absolutely clear to the person who is
not an advanced student of occultism, still I shall try to throw at least
some light on the underlying principles of this wonderful class of occult
phenomena. The main point for the student to realize is that there are
natural laws underlying this phenomenon, and that it is not a matter of
supernatural power, or necessarily of divine special dispensation.

In the first place, in some of the simpler forms of future-time
clairvoyance, there is merely a high development of subconscious reasoning
from analogy. That is to say, the subconscious mental faculties of the
person reason out that such-and-so being the case, then it follows that
so-and-so will result, unless something entirely unexpected should prevent
or intervene. This is merely an extension of certain forms of reasoning
that we perform ordinarily. For instance, we see a child playing with a
sharp tool, and we naturally reason that it will cut itself. We see a man
acting in certain ways which generally lead to certain ends, and we
naturally reason that the expected result will occur. The more experience
that the observer has had, and the keener his faculty of perception and
his power of deductive reasoning, the wider will be the range of his power
in the direction of predicting future results from present happenings and
conditions.

In this connection, we must remember that the ordinary clairvoyant has
easier access to his subconscious mentality than has the average person.
The subconscious mind perceives and notes many little things that the
conscious mind overlooks, and therefore has better data from which to
reason. Moreover, as all students of the subconscious know, these
wonderful subconscious mental factulties have a very highly developed
power of reasoning deductively from a given premise or fact. In fact, the
subconscious faculties are almost perfect reasoning machines, providing
they are supplied with correct data in the first place. Much of the
so-called "intuitive reasoning" of persons arises from the operations of
the subconscious mental faculties just mentioned.

But, you may say, this is very interesting, but it is not clairvoyance.
Certainly, good student, but still clairvoyance plays an important part
even in this elementary form of prevision and future-seeing. You must
remember that by clairvoyant vision the real thoughts and feelings of a
person may be perceived. But, unless the attention of the clairvoyant is
specially directed to this, the conscious mind does not note it, and the
matter reaches the subconscious faculties without interference or
conscious knowledge on the part of the clairvoyant. This being so, it will
be seen that the subconscious mind of the clairvoyant is able to reason
deductively, in such cases, far beyond the power of even the subconscious
mind of the ordinary person--it has fuller data and more complete material
to work upon, of course.

It has become a proverb of the race that "coming events cast their shadows
before"; and many persons frequently have little flashes of future-time
seeing without realizing that they are really exercising elementary
clairvoyant powers. The combination of even a simple form of clairvoyance
and an active subconscious mind will often produce very wonderful
results--although not of course the more complex phenomena of full
clairvoyance and prevision. Some persons have claimed that even this form
of prevision implies something like fate or predestination, but this is
not fully true, for we must remember the fact that in some cases it is
possible to so act in accordance with a clairvoyant warning of this kind
that the impending calamity may be escaped. But, on the other hand, we
must also remember that every event is the result of certain preceding
events, without which it could not have happened, and which existing it
must happen unless some new element intervenes. There is such a thing as
cause and effect, we must remember--and if we can reason clearly from one
to the other with sufficient clearness, then we may actually prophesy
certain things in advance, always making allowance for the intervention of
the unexpected.

An authority says on this phase of the question: "There is no doubt
whatever that, just as what is happening now is the result of causes set
in motion in the past, so what will happen in the future will be the
result of causes already in operation. Even on this plane of life we can
calculate that if certain actions are performed, certain results will
follow; but our reckoning is constantly liable to be disturbed by the
interference of factors which we have not been able to take into account.
But if we raise our consciousness to the higher planes we can see much
further into the results of our actions. We can trace, for example, the
effect of a casual word, not only upon the person to whom it was
addressed, but through him on many others as it is passed on in widening
circles, until it seems to have affected the whole country; and one
glimpse of such a vision is more efficient than any number of moral
precepts in impressing upon us the necessity of extreme circumspection in
thought, word, and deed. Not only can we from that plane see thus fully
the result of every action, but we can also see where and in what way the
results of other actions apparently quite unconnected with it will
interfere with and modify it. In fact, it may be said that the results of
all causes at present in action are clearly visible--that the future, as
it would be if no entirely new causes should arise, lies open before our
gaze.

"New causes of course do arise, because man's will is free; but in the
case of all ordinary people the use which they make of their freedom may
be calculated beforehand with considerable accuracy. The average man has
so little real will that he is very much the creature of circumstances;
his action in previous lives places him amid certain surroundings, and
their influence upon him is so very much the most important factor in his
life-story that his future course may be predicted with almost
mathematical certainty. With the developed man the case is different; for
him also the main events of life are arranged by his past actions, but the
way in which he will allow them to affect him, the methods by which he
will deal with them and perhaps triumph over them--these are all his own,
and they cannot be foreseen even on the mental plane except as
probabilities.

"Looking down on man's life in this way from above, it seems as though his
free will could be exercised only in certain crises in his career. He
arrives at a point in his life where there are obviously two or three
alternative courses open before him; he is absolutely free to choose which
of them he pleases, and although someone who knew his nature thoroughly
well might feel almost certain what his choice would be, such knowledge on
his friend's part is in no sense a compelling force. But when he has
chosen, he has to go through with it and take the consequences; having
entered upon a particular path he may, in many cases, be forced to go on
for a very long time before he has any opportunity to turn aside. His
position is somewhat like that of a driver of a train; when he comes to a
junction he may have the points set either this way or that, and so can
pass on to whichever line he pleases, but when he has passed on to one of
them he is compelled to run on along the line which he has selected until
he reaches another set of points, where again an opportunity of choice is
offered to him."

But, interesting and wonderful as this phase of future-time clairvoyance
undoubtedly is, it pales before the fuller and more complete phases. And,
in the latter, we must look elsewhere for the explanation--or approach to
an explanation. The explanation of this higher form of future-time
clairvoyance must be looked for in a new conception of the nature and
meaning of time. It is difficult to approach this question without
becoming at once involved in technical metaphysical discussion. As an
example of this difficulty, I invite you to consider the following from
Sir Oliver Lodge, in his address to the British Association, at Cardiff,
several years ago. While what he says is very clear to the mind of a
person trained along these lines of subtle thought, it will be almost like
Greek to the average person. Sir Oliver Lodge said:

"A luminous and helpful idea is that time is but a relative mode of
regarding things; we progress through phenomena at a certain definite
pace, and this subjective advance we interpret in an objective manner, as
if events moved necessarily in this order and at this precise rate. But
that may be only one mode of regarding them. The events may be in some
sense of existence always, both past and future, and it may be we who are
arriving at them, not they which are happening. The analogy of a traveller
in a railway train is useful; if he could never leave the train nor alter
its pace he would probably consider the landscapes as necessarily
successive and be unable to conceive their co-existence * * * We perceive,
therefore, a possible fourth dimensional aspect about time, the
inexorableness of whose flow may be a natural part of our present
limitations. And if we once grasp the idea that past and future may be
actually existing, we can recognize that they may have a controlling
influence on all present action, and the two together may constitute the
'higher plane' or totality of things after which, as it seems to me, we
are impelled to seek, in connection with the directing of form or
determinism, and the action of living being consciously directed to a
definite and preconceived end."

Sir Oliver's illustration is somewhat akin to that of a person who sees a
moving-picture show for the first time, and does not know how it is
produced. To him it looks as if the events of the pictured story actually
were developing and happening in time, whereas, in reality the whole
picture is existing at one time. Its past, present and future is already
pictured, and may be seen by one who knows the secret and how to look for
the past or future scene; while, to the ordinary observer, the scene
progresses in sequence, the present being followed by something else which
is at this moment "in the future," and therefore, unknowable. To the
senses of the ordinary observer only the present is in existence; while,
in fact, the "future" is equally truly in existence at the same time,
although not evident to the senses of the observer. Think over this a
little, and let the idea sink into your mind--it may help you to
understand something concerning the mystery of future-time clairvoyance,
prevision, or second-sight.

Time, you know, is far more relative than we generally conceive it. It is
a scientific fact that a person in the dream state may cover years of
time in a dream that occupies only a few seconds of time. Persons have
nodded and awakened immediately afterwards (as proved by others present in
the room), and yet in that moment's time they have dreamed of long
journeys to foreign lands, great campaigns of war, etc. Moreover, a loud
sound (a pistol shot, for instance) which has awakened a sleeping person,
has also set into effect a dream-state train of circumstances,
constituting a long dream-state story which, after many events and
happenings, terminated in the shot of a firing-squad--and then the man
awoke. Now in this last mentioned case, not only has the dreamer
experienced events covering a long time, all in the space of a second of
time; but, also, the very sound which terminated the dream, also induced
it from the very beginning--the last thing caused the first things to
appear and proceed in sequence to the last! Persons under the influence of
chloroform, or "laughing gas," have similar experiences--often the first
sound heard at the moment of recovering consciousness seems to be the last
thing in a long dream which preceded it, though the long dream was really
caused by the final sound. Now, remember, that here not only did past,
present and future exist at the same moment of time; but, also, the future
caused the past and present to come into being.

On the physical plane, we have analogies illustrating this fact. It is
said that in every acorn rests and exists, in miniature, the form of the
future oak. And, some go so far as to say that the oak is the "ultimate
cause" of the acorn--that the idea of the oak caused the acorn to be at
all. In the same way, the "idea" of the man must be in the infant boy,
from the moment of birth, and even from the moment of conception.
But, let us pass on to the bold conception of the most advanced
metaphysicians--they have a still more dazzling explanation, let us listen
to it.

These occultists and metaphysicians who have thought long and deeply upon
the ultimate facts and nature of the universe, have dared to think that
there must exist some absolute consciousness--some absolute mind--which
must perceive the past, present and future of the universe as one
happening; as simultaneously and actively present at one moment of
absolute time. They reason that just as man may see as one happening of a
moment of his time some particular event which might appear as a year to
some minute form of life and mind--the microscopic creatures in a drop of
water, for instance; so that which seems as a year, or a hundred years, to
the mind of man may appear as the happening of a single moment of a higher
scale of time to some exalted Being or form of consciousness on a higher
plane. You remember that it is said that "a thousand years is but as a day
to the Lord;" and the Hindu Vedas tell us that "the creation, duration,
and destruction of the universe, is as but the time of the twinkling of an
eye to Brahman." I shall not proceed further along this line--I have given
you a very strong hint here; you must work it out for yourself, if you
feel so disposed. But there are certain consequences arising from this
ultimate universal fact, which I must mention before passing on.

The high occult teachings hold that there is a plane of the higher astral
world which may be said to carry a reflection of the Universal Mind--just
as a lake contains a reflection of the distant mountain. Well, then, the
clairvoyant vision at times is able to penetrate to the realm of that
astral reflecting medium, and see somewhat dimly what is pictured there.
As the future may be discerned in this reflected picture, by the
clairvoyant mind, we see how future-seeing, prevision, and second-sight
may be explained scientifically.

A writer has said: "On this plane, in some manner which down here is
totally inexplicable, the past, the present, and the future, are all there
existing simultaneously. One can only accept this fact, for its cause lies
in the faculty of that exalted plane, and the way in which this higher
faculty works is naturally quite incomprehensible to the physical brain.
Yet now and then one may meet with a hint that seems to bring us a trifle
nearer to a dim possibility of comprehension. When the pupil's
consciousness is fully developed upon this higher plane, therefore,
perfect prevision is possible to him, though he may not--nay, he certainly
will not--be able to bring the whole result of his sight through fully and
in order into his physical consciousness. Still, a great deal of clear
foresight is obviously within his power whenever he likes to exercise it;
and even when he is not exercising it, frequent flashes of foreknowledge
come through into his ordinary life, so that he often has an instantaneous
intuition as to how things will turn out."

The same writer says: "Short of perfect prevision we find that all degrees
of this type of clairvoyance exist, from the occasional vague premonitions
which cannot in any true sense be called sight at all, up to frequent and
fairly complete second-sight. The faculty to which this latter somewhat
misleading name has been given is an extremely interesting one, and would
well repay more careful and systematic study than has hitherto been given
to it. It is best known to us as a not infrequent possession of the
Scottish Highlanders, though it is by no means confined to them.
Occasional instances of it have appeared in almost every nation, but it
has always been commonest among mountaineers and men of lonely life. With
us in England it is often spoken of as if it were the exclusive appanage
of the Celtic race, but in reality it has appeared among similarly
situated peoples the world over, it is stated, for example, to be very
common among the Westphalian peasantry.

"Sometimes the second-sight consists of a picture clearly foreshowing some
coming event; more frequently, perhaps, the glimpse of the future is given
in some symbolical appearance. It is noteworthy that the events foreseen
are invariably unpleasant ones--death being the commonest of all; I do not
recollect a single instance in which the second-sight has shown anything
which was not of the most gloomy nature. It has a ghastly symbolism of
its own--a symbolism of shrouds and corpse-candles, and other funeral
horrors. In some cases it appears to be to a certain extent dependent upon
locality, for it is stated that inhabitants of the Isle of Skye who
possess the faculty often lose it when they leave the island, even though
it be only to cross to the mainland. The gift of such sight is sometimes
hereditary in a family for generations, but this is not an invariable
rule, for it often appears sporadically in one member of a family
otherwise free from its lugubrious influence.

"There may be still some people who deny the possibility of prevision, but
such denial simply shows their ignorance of the evidence on the subject.
The large number of authenticated cases leave no room for doubt as to the
fact, but many of them are of such a nature as to render a reasonable
explanation by no means easy to find. It is evident that the Ego possesses
a certain amount of previsional faculty, and if the events foreseen were
always of great importance, one might suppose that an extraordinary
stimulus had enabled him for that occasion only to make a clear impression
of what he saw upon his lower personality. No doubt that is the
explanation of many of the cases in which death or grave disaster is
foreseen, but there are a large number of instances on record to which it
does not seem to apply, since the events foretold are frequently trivial
and unimportant."

In the following chapter I shall present to your consideration some very
remarkable cases of future-time clairvoyance, prevision, or second-sight;
some of these are historical cases, and all are vouched for by the best
authorities. I quote these cases not merely for their own interesting
features, but also to give you an idea of how remarkable some of these
instances are; and also to give you a clear conception of the way in which
this form of clairvoyance tends to manifest itself.

Before passing on to these interesting cases, however, I wish to remind
you that in future-time clairvoyance, as well as in past-time
clairvoyance, the phenomenon may be manifested in many ways and according
to several methods. That is to say, that in future-time clairvoyance the
vision may come in the state of meditation or reverie; it may come along
the lines of psychometry, some associated object or person supplying the
connecting link; or, again, it may come as the result of crystal-gazing,
etc. This is as we might naturally expect, for this form of clairvoyance
is merely one special and particular phase of clairvoyance in general, and
of course, comes under the general laws and rules governing all
clairvoyant phenomena.

Future-time clairvoyance, prevision and second-sight may, like any other
form of clairvoyance, be developed and unfolded, by means of the same
rules and methods that I have already suggested to you in the preceding
lessons. It is all a matter of attention, application, patience, exercise
and practice. I may say, however, that the strong desire and wish for the
perception of future events, held firmly in mind during the practicing and
exercising, will tend to unfold and develop the clairvoyant faculties in
this particular direction. Strong desire, and earnest attention in the
desired direction, will do much to cultivate, develop and unfold any
psychic faculty.

Just as meditation and reverie about past times and things tend to develop
past-time clairvoyance, so will meditation and reverie about future time
and things tend to develop prevision and the seeing of future things.
This, indeed, is the very first step toward the attainment of this form of
clairvoyance. The attention clears the psychic path, over which the astral
faculties travel. In the astral, as on the physical, the rule is: always
look where you are going--look ahead on the path over which you wish to
travel.




LESSON XIII.

SECOND-SIGHT, PREVISION, ETC.


Notwithstanding the difficulties in the way of an intelligent explanation
of the phenomena of future-time clairvoyance, second-sight, prevision,
etc., of which I have spoken in the preceding lesson, the human race has
always had a lively reminder of the existence of such phenomena; and the
records of the race have always contained many instances of the
manifestation thereof. Among all peoples, in all lands, in all times,
there have been noted remarkable instances of the power of certain persons
to peer into, and correctly report from, the mysterious regions of the
future. Passing from the traditional reports of the race, and the minor
instances known to almost every person, we find that the scientific
investigators of psychic phenomena have gathered together an enormous
array of well authenticated cases of this class. The reports of the
Society for Psychical research contain hundreds of such cases, which the
student may read and study with interest and profit.

It is not my intention to present a full history of the reports of this
character. Rather, I shall call your attention to a few striking cases, in
order to illustrate the phenomenon clearly and forcibly. There is such a
wealth of material of this kind that it embarrases one who wishes to
select from it. However, I shall do the best I can in that direction.
Following, to commence with, I give you extracts from a well known case
reported by a prominent member of the Theosophical Society, which has
attracted much attention. It was related to this person by one of the
actors in the scene. It happened in India. A party of English army
officers was entering a dense jungle. Then follows the story, as below:

"We plunged into the jungle, and had walked on for about an hour without
much success, when Cameron, who happened to be next to me, stopped
suddenly, turned pale as death, and, pointing straight before him, cried
in accents of horror: 'See! see! merciful heavens, look there!' 'Where?
what? what is it?' we all shouted confusedly, as we rushed up to him, and
looked around in expectation of encountering a tiger--a cobra--we hardly
knew what, but assuredly something terrible, since it had been sufficient
to cause such evident emotion in our usually self-contained comrade. But
neither tiger nor cobra was visible--nothing but Cameron pointing with
ghastly haggard face and starting eyeballs at something we could not see.

"'Cameron! Cameron!' cried I, seizing his arm, 'for heavens sake speak!
What is the matter?' Scarcely were the words out of my mouth when a low
but very peculiar sound struck upon my ear, and Cameron, dropping his
pointing hand, said in a hoarse, strained voice, 'There! you heard it?
Thank God it's over!' and fell to the ground insensible. There was a
momentary confusion while we unfastened his collar, and I dashed in his
face some water which I fortunately had in my flask, while another tried
to pour brandy between his clenched teeth; and under cover of it I
whispered to the man next to me (one of our greatest skeptics, by the
way), 'Beauchamp, did you hear anything?' 'Why, yes,' he replied, 'a
curious sound, very; a sort of crash or rattle far away in the distance,
yet very distinct; if the thing were not utterly impossible, I could have
sworn that it was the rattle of musketry.' 'Just my impression,' murmured
I; 'but hush! he is recovering.'

"In a minute or two he was able to speak feebly, and began to thank us and
apologize for giving trouble; and soon he sat up, leaning against a tree,
and in a firm, though low voice said: 'My dear friends, I feel that I owe
you an explanation of my extraordinary behavior. It is an explanation that
I would fain avoid giving; but it must come some time, and so may as well
be given now. You may perhaps have noticed that when during our voyage you
all joined in scoffing at dreams, portents and visions, I invariably
avoided giving any opinion on the subject. I did so because, while I had
no desire to court ridicule or provoke discussion, I was unable to agree
with you, knowing only too well from my own dread experience that the
world which men agree to call that of the supernatural is just as real
as--nay, perhaps even more real than--this world we see about us. In other
words, I, like many of my countrymen, am cursed with the gift of
second-sight--that awful faculty which foretells in vision calamities
that are shortly to occur.

"'Such a vision I had just now, and its exceptional horror moved me as you
have seen. I saw before me a corpse--not that of one who has died a
peaceful, natural death, but that of the victim of some terrible accident;
a ghastly, shapeless mass, with a face swollen, crushed, unrecognizable. I
saw this dreadful object placed in a coffin, and the funeral service
performed over it. I saw the burial-ground, I saw the clergyman: and
though I had never seen either before, I can picture both perfectly in my
mind's eye now; I saw you, myself, Beauchamp, all of us and many more,
standing round as mourners; I saw the soldiers raise their muskets after
the service was over; I heard the volley they fired--and then I knew no
more.' As he spoke of that volley of musketry I glanced across with a
shudder at Beauchamp, and the look of stony horror on that handsome
skeptic's face was not to be forgotten."

Omitting the somewhat long recital of events which followed, I would say
that later in the same day the party of young officers and soldiers
discovered the body of their commanding officer in the shocking condition
so vividly and graphically described by young Cameron. The story proceeds
as follows:

"When, on the following evening, we arrived at our destination, and our
melancholy deposition had been taken down by the proper authorities,
Cameron and I went out for a quiet walk, to endeavor with the assistance
of the soothing influence of nature to shake off something of the gloom
which paralyzed our spirits. Suddenly he clutched my arm, and, pointing
through some rude railings, said in a trembling voice, 'Yes, there it is!
that is the burial-ground of yesterday.' And, when later on we were
introduced to the chaplain of the post, I noticed, though my friends did
not, the irrepressible shudder with which Cameron took his hand, and I
knew that he had recognized the clergyman of his vision."

The story concludes with the statement that in all the little details, as
well as the main points, the scene at the burial of the commanding officer
corresponded exactly with the vision of Cameron. This story brings out the
fact that the Scotch people are especially given to manifestations of
second-sight--particularly the Highlanders or mountain people of that
land. It is hard to find a Scotchman, who, in his heart, does not believe
in second-sight, and who has not known of some well authenticated instance
of its manifestation. In other lands, certain races, or sub-races, seem to
be specially favored (or cursed, as Cameron asserted) with this power. It
will be noticed, usually, that such people dwell, or have dwelt in the
highlands or mountains of their country. There seems to be something in
the mountains and hills which tends to develop and encourage this power in
those dwelling among them. The story is also remarkable in the fact that
the impression was so strong in the mind of Cameron that it actually
communicated itself by clairaudience to those near to him--this is quite
unusual, though not without correspondence in other cases. Otherwise, the
case is merely a typical one, and may be duplicated in the experience of
thousands of other men and women.

George Fox, the pioneer Quaker, had this faculty well developed, and
numerous instances of its manifestation by him are recorded. For instance,
he foretold the death of Cromwell, when he met him riding at Hampton
Court; he said that he felt "a waft of death" around and about Cromwell;
and Cromwell died shortly afterwards. Fox also publicly foretold the
dissolution of the Rump Parliament of England; the restoration of Charles
II; and the Great Fire of London--these are historical facts, remember.
For that matter, history contains many instances of this kind: the
prophecy of Caesar's death, and its further prevision by his wife, for
instance. The Bible prophecies and predictions, major and minor, give us
semi-historical instances.

A celebrated historical instance of remarkable second-sight and prevision,
is that of Cazotte, whose wonderful prediction and its literal fulfilment
are matters of French history. Dumas has woven the fact into one of his
stories, in a dramatic manner--but even so he does not make the tale any
more wonderful than the bare facts. Here is the recital of the case by La
Harpe, the French writer, who was a personal witness of the occurrence,
and whose testimony was corroborated by many others who were present at
the time. La Harpe says:

"It appears as but yesterday, and yet, nevertheless, it was at the
beginning of the year 1788. We were dining with one of our brethren at the
Academy--a man of considerable wealth and genius. The conversation became
serious; much admiration was expressed on the revolution in thought which
Voltaire had effected, and it was agreed that it was his first claim to
the reputation he enjoyed. We concluded that the revolution must soon be
consummated; that it was indispensible that superstition and fanaticism
should give way to philosophy, and we began to calculate the probability
of the period when this should be, and which of the present company should
live to see it. The oldest complained that they could scarcely flatter
themselves with the hope; the younger rejoiced that they might entertain
this very probable expectation; and they congratulated the Academy
especially for having prepared this great work, and for having been the
rallying point, the centre, and the prime mover of the liberty of thought.

"One only of the guests had not taken part in all the joyousness of this
conversation, and had even gently and cheerfully checked our splendid
enthusiasm. This was Cazotte, an amiable and original man, but unhappily
infatuated with the reveries of the illumaniti. He spoke, and with the
most serious tone, saying: 'Gentleman, be satisfied; you will all see this
great and sublime revolution, which you so much desire. You know that I am
a little inclined to prophesy; I repeat, you will see it,' He was answered
by the common rejoinder: 'One need not be a conjuror to see that.' He
answered: 'Be it so; but perhaps one must be a little more than conjuror
for what remains for me to tell you. Do you know what will be the
consequences of this revolution--what will be the consequence to all of
you, and what will be the immediate result--the well-established
effect--the thoroughly recognized consequences to all of you who are here
present?'

"'Ah' said Condorcet, with his insolent and half-suppressed smile, 'let us
hear--a philosopher is not sorry to encounter a prophet--let us hear!'
Cazotte replied: 'You, Monsier de Condorcet--you will yield up your last
breath on the floor of a dungeon; you will die from poison, which you will
have taken in order to escape from execution--from poison which the
happiness of that time will oblige you to carry about your person. You,
Monsieur de Chamfort, you will open your veins with twenty-two cuts of a
razor, and yet will not die till some months afterward.' These personages
looked at each other, and laughed again. Cazotte continued: 'You, Monsieur
Vicq d'Azir, you will not open your own veins, but you will cause yourself
to be bled six times in one day, during a paroxysm of the gout, in order
to make more sure of your end, and you will die in the night.'

"Cazotte went on: 'You, Monsieur de Nicolai, you will die on the scaffold;
you, Monsieur Bailly, on the scaffold; you, Monsieur de Malesherbes, on
the scaffold. 'Ah, God be thanked,' exclaimed Roucher, 'and what of I?'
Cazotte replied: 'You? you also will die on the scaffold.' 'Yes,' replied
Chamfort, 'but when will all this happen?' Cazotte answered: 'Six years
will not pass over, before all that I have said to you shall be
accomplished.' Here I (La Harpe) spoke, saying: 'Here are some astonishing
miracles, but you have not included me in your list.' Cazotte answered me,
saying: 'But you will be there, as an equally extraordinary miracle; you
will then be a Christian!' Vehement exclamations on all sides followed
this startling assertion. 'Ah!' said Chamfort, 'I am conforted; if we
shall perish only when La Harpe shall be a Christian, we are immortal;'

"Then observed Madame la Duchesse de Grammont: 'As for that, we women, we
are happy to be counted for nothing in these revolutions: when I say for
nothing, it is not that we do not always mix ourselves up with them a
little; but it is a received maxim that they take no notice of us, and of
our sex.' 'Your sex, ladies' said Cazotte, 'your sex will not protect you
this time; and you had far better meddle with nothing, for you will be
treated entirely as men, without any difference whatever.' 'But what,
then, are you really telling us of Monsieur Cazotte? You are preaching to
us the end of the world.' 'I know nothing on that subject; but what I do
know is, that you Madame la Duchesse, will be conducted to the scaffold,
you and many other ladies with you, in the cart of the executioner, and
with your hands tied behind your backs. 'Ah! I hope that in that case, I
shall at least have a carriage hung in black.' 'No, madame; higher ladies
than yourself will go, like you, in the common car, with their hands tied
behind them.' 'Higher ladies! what! the princesses of the blood?' 'Yea,
and still more exalted personages!' replied Cazotte.

"Here a sensible emotion pervaded the whole company, and the countenance
of the host was dark and lowering--they began to feel that the joke was
becoming too serious. Madame de Grammont, in order to dissipate the cloud,
took no notice of the reply, and contented herself with saying in a
careless tone: 'You see, that he will not leave me even a confessor!' 'No,
madame!' replied Cazotte, 'you will not have one--neither you, nor any one
besides. The last victim to whom this favor will be afforded will be--'
Here he stopped for a moment. 'Well! who then will be the happy mortal to
whom this prerogative will be given?' Cazotte replied: 'It is the only one
which he will have then retained--and that will be the King of France!'"
This last startling prediction caused the company to disband in something
like terror and dismay, for the mere mention of such thing was akin to
treason.

The amazing sequel to this strange story is that within the six years
allotted by the prophecy, every detail thereof was verified absolutely.
The facts are known to all students of the French Revolution, and may be
verified by reference to any history of that terrible period. To
appreciate the startling nature of the prophecy when made, one needs but
to be acquainted with the position and characteristics of the persons
whose destinies were foretold. This celebrated instance of highly advanced
future-time clairvoyance, or prevision, has never been equalled. The
reason, perhaps, is that Cazotte indeed was an advanced and highly
developed occultist--the account mentions this, you will notice. This
class of persons very seldom prophecy in this way, for reasons known to
all occultists. The ordinary cases recorded are those in which the
manifestation is that of a person of lesser powers and less perfect
development.

Advanced occultists know the danger of a careless use of this power. They
know that (omitting other and very important reasons) such revelations
would work a terrible effect upon the minds of persons not sufficiently
well balanced to stand the disclosure. Moreover, they know that if the
average person knew the principal details of his future life on earth,
then he would lose interest in it--it would become stale and would lose
the attraction of the unknown. In such a case, the pleasant things to come
would lose their attractiveness by reason of having been dwelt on so long
that their flavor was lost; and the unpleasant things would become
unbearable by reason of the continual anticipation of them. We are apt to
discount our pleasures by dwelling too much upon them in anticipation;
and, as we all know, the dread of a coming evil often is worse than the
thing itself--we suffer a thousand pangs in anticipation to one in
reality. But, as I have intimated, there are other, and still more serious
reasons why the advanced occultists do not indulge in public prophecies
of this kind. It is probable that Cazotte decided to, and was permitted
to, make his celebrated prophecy for some important occult reason of which
La Harpe had no knowledge--it doubtless was a part of the working out of
some great plan, and it may have accomplished results undreamed of by us.
At any rate, it was something very much out of the; ordinary, even in the
case of advanced occultists and masters of esoteric knowledge.

Another case which has a historic value is the well-known case concerning
the assassination of Spencer Perceval, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, in
England, which occurred in the lobby of the House of Commons. The persons
who have a knowledge of the case report that some nine days before the
tragic occurrence a Cornish mine manager, named John Williams, had a
vision, three times in succession, in which he saw a small man, dressed in
a blue coat and white waistcoat, enter the lobby of the House of Commons;
whereupon another man, dressed in a snuff-colored coat, stepped forward,
and, drawing a pistol from an inside pocket fired at and shot the small
man, the bullet lodging in the left breast. In the vision, Williams turned
and asked some bystander the name of the victim; the bystander replied
that the stricken man was Mr. Spencer Perceval, the Chancellor of the
Exchequer. The valuable feature of the case, from a scientific standpoint,
lies in the fact that Williams was very much impressed by his
thrice-repeated vision, and was greatly disturbed thereby. His anxiety
was so great that he spoke of the matter to several friends, and asked
them whether it would not be well for him to go to London for the purpose
of warning Mr. Perceval. His friends ridiculed the whole matter, and
persuaded him to give up the idea of visiting London for the purpose
named. Those who had a knowledge of the vision were greatly startled and
shocked when several days afterward the assassination occurred, agreeing
in perfect detail with the vision of the Cornishman. The case, vouched for
as it was by a number of reliable persons who had been consulted by
Williams, attracted much attention at the time, and has since passed into
the history of remarkable instances of prevision.

In some cases, however, the prevision seems to come as a warning, and in
many cases the heeding of the warning has prevented the unpleasant
features from materializing as seen in the vision. Up to the point of the
action upon the warning the occurrence agree perfectly with the
vision--but the moment the warned person acts so as to prevent the
occurrence, the whole train of circumstances is broken. There is an occult
explanation of this, but it is too technical to mention at this place.

What is known to psychic researchers as "the Hannah Green case" is of this
character. This story, briefly, is that Hannah Green, a housekeeper of
Oxfordshire, dreamt that she, having been left alone in the house of a
Sunday evening, heard a knock at the door. Opening the door she found a
tramp who tried to force his way into the house. She struggled to prevent
his entrance, but he struck her with a bludgeon and rendered her
insensible, whereupon he entered the house and robbed it. She related the
vision to her friends, but, as nothing happened for some time, the matter
almost passed from her mind. But, some seven years afterward, she was left
in charge of the house on a certain Sunday evening; during the evening she
was startled by a sudden knock at the door, and her former vision was
recalled to her memory quite vividly. She refused to go to the door,
remembering the warning, but instead went up to a landing on the stair and
looked out the window, she saw at the door the very tramp whom she had
seen in the vision some seven years before, armed with a bludgeon and
striving to force an entrance into the house. She took steps to frighten
away the rascal, and she was saved from the unpleasant conclusion of her
vision. Many similar cases are recorded.

In some cases persons have been warned by symbols of various kinds; or
else have had prevision in the same way. For instance, many cases are
known in which the vision is that of the undertaker's wagon standing
before the door of the person who dies sometime afterward. Or, the person
is visioned clad in a shroud. The variations of this class are
innumerable. Speak to the average dweller in the highlands of Scotland, or
certain counties in Ireland, regarding this--you will be furnished with a
wealth of illustrations and examples.

This phase of the general subject of clairvoyance is very fascinating to
the student and investigator, and is one in which the highest psychic or
astral powers of sensing are called into play. In fact, as I have said,
there is here a reflection of something very much higher than the astral
or psychic planes of being. The student catches a glimpse of regions
infinitely higher and grander. He begins to realize at least something of
the existence of that Universal Consciousness "in which we live, and move,
and have our being;" and of the reality of the Eternal Now, in which past,
present and future are blended as one fact of infinite consciousness. He
sees the signboard pointing to marvelous truths!




LESSON XIV.

ASTRAL-BODY TRAVELING


There is much confusion existing in the minds of the average students of
occultism concerning the distinction between astral visioning by means of
the astral senses in clairvoyance, and the visioning of the astral senses
during the travels of the astral body away from the physical body. There
is such a close connection between the two several phases of occult
phenomena that it is easy to mistake one for the other; in fact, there is
often such a blending of the two that it is quite difficult to distinguish
between them. However, in this lesson I shall endeavor to bring out the
characteristics of astral body visioning, that the student may learn to
distinguish them from those of the ordinary clairvoyant astral visioning,
and recognize them when he experiences them.

The main points of distinction are these: When visioning clairvoyantly by
means of the astral senses, as described in the preceding chapters of this
book, the clairvoyant usually perceives the scene, person or event as a
picture on a flat surface. It is true that there is generally a perfect
perspective, similar to that of a good stereoscopic view, or that of a
high-grade moving picture photograph--the figures "stand out," and do not
appear "flat" as in the case of an ordinary photograph; but still at the
best it is like looking at a moving picture, inasmuch as the whole scene
is all in front of you. Visioning in the astral body, on the contrary,
gives you an "all around" view of the scene. That is to say, in such case
you see the thing just as you would were you there in your physical
body--you see in front of you; on the sides of you, out of the corner of
your eye; if you turn your head, you may see in any direction; and you may
turn around and see what is happening behind you. In the first case you
are merely gazing at an astral picture in front of you; while in the
second place you are ACTUALLY THERE IN PERSON.

There are some limitations to this "seeing all around" when in the astral
body, however, which I should note in passing. For instance, if when in
the astral body you examine the akashic records of the past, or else peer
into the scenes of the future, you will see these things merely as a
picture, and will not be conscious of being present personally in the
scene. (An apparent exception is to be noted here, also, viz., if your
past-time visioning includes the perception of yourself in a former
incarnation, you may be conscious of living and acting in your former
personality; again, if you are psychometrizing from fossil remains, or
anything concerned with a living creature of the past, you may "take on"
the mental or emotional conditions of that creature, and seem to sense
things from the inside, rather than from the outside. This, of course, is
also a characteristic of the ordinary clairvoyant vision of the past.) But
when, in the astral body, you perceive a present-time scene in space, you
are, to all intents and purposes, an actual participant--you are actually
present at the place and time. The sense of "being actually present in
the body" is the leading characteristic of the astral body visioning, and
distinguishes it from the "picture seeing" sensing of ordinary
clairvoyance. This is stating the matter is as plain and simple form as is
possible, ignoring many technical details and particulars.

You, being a student of occultism, of course know that the astral body is
a fine counterpart of the physical body, composed of a far more subtle
form of substance than is the latter, that under certain conditions you
may travel in your astral body, detached from your physical body (except
being connected with it with a slender astral cord, bearing a close
resemblance to the umbilical cord which connects the newborn babe with the
placenta in the womb of its mother), and explore the realms of the astral
plane. This projection of the astral body, as a rule, occurs only when the
physical body is stilled in sleep, or in trance condition. In fact, the
astral body frequently is projected by us during the course of our
ordinary sleep, but we fail to remember what we have seen in our astral
journeys, except, occasionally, dim flashes of partial recollection upon
awakening. In some cases, however, our astral visioning is so distinct and
vivid, that we awaken with a sense of having had a peculiar experience,
and as having actually been out of the physical body at the time.

In some cases, the person traveling in the astral is able to actually take
part in the distant scene, and may, under certain circumstances actually
materialize himself so as to be seen by persons in their physical bodies.
I am speaking now, of course, of the untrained person. The trained and
developed occultist, of course, is able to do these things deliberately
and consciously, instead of unconsciously and without intention as in the
case of the ordinary person. I shall quote here from another writer on the
subject, whose point of view, in connection with my own, may serve to
bring about a clear understanding in the mind of the student--it is always
well to view any subject from as many angles as possible. This writer
says:

"We enter here upon an entirely new variety of clairvoyance, in which the
consciousness of the seer no longer remains in or closely connected with
his physical body, but is definitely transferred to the scene which he is
examining. Though it has no doubt greater dangers for the untrained seer
than either of the other methods, it is yet quite the most satisfactory
form of clairvoyance open to him. In this case, the man's body is either
asleep or in a trance, and its organs are consequently not available for
use while the vision is going on, so that all description of what is seen,
and all questioning as to further particulars, must be postponed until the
wanderer returns to this plane. On the other hand, the sight is much
fuller and more perfect; the man hears as well as sees everything which
passes before him, and can move about freely at will within the very wide
limits of the astral plane. He has also the immense advantage of being
able to take part, as it were, in the scenes which come before his
eyes--of conversing at will with various entities on the astral plane, and
from whom so much information that is curious and interesting may be
obtained. If in addition he can learn how to materialize himself (a matter
of no great difficulty for him when once the knack is acquired), he will
be able to take part in physical events or conversations at a distance,
and to show himself to an absent friend at will.

"Again, he will have the additional power of being able to hunt about for
what he wants. By means of the other varieties of clairvoyance, for all
practical purposes he may find a person or place only when he is already
acquainted with it; or, when he is put en rapport with it by touching
something physically connected with it, as in psychometry. By the use of
the astral body, however, a man can move about quite freely and rapidly in
any direction, and can (for example) find without difficulty any place
pointed out upon a map, without either any previous knowledge of the spot
or any object to establish a connection with it. He can also readily rise
high into the air so as to gain a bird's eye view of the country which he
is examining, so as to observe its extent, the contour of its coastline,
or its general character. Indeed, in every way his power and freedom are
far greater when he uses this method than they are in any of the lesser
forms of clairvoyance."

In many well authenticated cases, we may see that the soul of a dying
person, one whose physical end is approaching, visits friends and
relatives in the astral body, and in many cases materializes and even
speaks to them. In such cases the dying person accomplishes the feat of
astral manifestation without any special occult knowledge; the weakened
links between the physical and the higher phases of the soul render the
temporary passing-out comparatively easy, and the strong desire of the
dying person furnishes the motive power necessary. Such visits, however,
are often found to be merely the strongly charged thought of the dying
person, along the lines of telepathy, as I have previously explained to
you. But in many cases there can be no doubt that the phenomenon is a
clear case of astral visitation and materialization.

The records of the Society for Psychical Research contain many instances
of this kind; and similar instances are to be found in other records of
psychical research. I shall quote a few of these cases for you, that you
may get a clear idea of the characteristics thereof. Andrew Lang, an
eminent student and investigator along the lines of the psychic and
occult, gives us the following case, of which he says, "Not many stories
have such good evidence in their favor." The story as related by Mr. Lang
in one of his books is as follows:

"Mary, the wife of John Goffe of Rochester, being afflicted with a long
illness, removed to her father's house at West Mailing, about nine miles
from her own. The day before her death she grew very impatiently desirous
to see her two children, whom she had left at home to the care of a
nurse. She was too ill to be moved, and between one and two o'clock in the
morning she fell into a trance. One widow, Turner, who watched with her
that night, says that her eyes were open and fixed, and her jaw fallen.
Mrs. Turner put her hand to her mouth, but could perceive no breath. She
thought her to be in a fit, and doubted whether she were dead or alive.
The next morning the dying woman told her mother that she had been at home
with her children, saying, 'I was with them last night when I was asleep.'

"The nurse at Rochester, widow Alexander by name, affirms that a little
before two o'clock that morning she saw the likeness of the said Mary
Goffe come out of the next chamber (where the elder child lay in a bed by
itself), the door being left open, and stood by her bedside for about a
quarter of an hour; the younger child was there lying by her. Her eyes
moved and her mouth went, but she said nothing. The nurse, moreover says
that she was perfectly awake; it was then daylight, being one of the
longest days of the year. She sat up in bed and looked steadfastly on the
apparition. In that time she heard the bridge clock strike two, and a
while after said: 'In the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, what art
thou?' Thereupon the apparition removed and went away; she slipped out of
her clothes and followed, but what became on't she cannot tell."

In the case just mentioned, Mr. Lang states that the nurse was so
frightened that she was afraid to return to bed. As soon as the neighbors
were up and about she told them of what she had seen; but they told her
that she had been dreaming. It was only when, later on, news came of what
had happened at the other end of the line--the bedside of the dying woman,
that they realized just what had happened.

In a work by Rev. F.G. Lee, there are several other cases of this kind
quoted, all of which are stated by Mr. Lee to be thoroughly well
authenticated. In one of the cases a mother, when dying in Egypt, appears
to her children in Torquay, and is clearly seen in broad daylight by all
five children and also by the nursemaid. In another, a Quaker lady dying
at Cockermouth is clearly seen and recognized in daylight by her three
children at Seattle, the remainder of the story being almost identical
with that of the Goffe case just quoted.

In the records of the Society for Psychical Research, the following case
appears, the person reporting it being said to be of good character and
reputation for truthfulness and reliability. The story is as follows: "One
morning in December, 1836, A. had the following dream, or he would prefer
to call it, revelation. He found himself suddenly at the gate of Major
N.M.'s avenue, many miles from his home. Close to him was a group of
persons, one of whom was a woman with a basket on her arm, the rest were
men, four of whom were tenants of his own, while the others were unknown
to him. Some of the strangers seemed to be assaulting H.W., one of his
tenants, and he interfered. A. says, 'I struck violently at the man on my
left, and then with greater violence at the man's face on my right.
Finding, to my surprise, that I had not knocked down either, I struck
again and again with all the violence of a man frenzied at the sight of my
poor friend's murder. To my great amazement I saw my arms, although
visible to my eye, were without substance, and the bodies of the men I
struck at and my own came close together after each blow, through the
shadowy arms I struck with. My blows were delivered with more extreme
violence than I ever think I exerted, but I became painfully convinced of
my incompetency. I have no consciousness of what happened after this
feeling of unsubstantiality came upon me.'

"Next morning, A. experienced the stiffness and soreness of violent bodily
exercise, and was informed by his wife that in the course of the night he
had much alarmed her by striking out again and again in a terrific manner,
'as if fighting for his life.' He, in turn, informed her of his dream, and
begged her to remember the names of those actors in it who were known to
him. On the morning of the following day (Wednesday) A. received a letter
from his agent, who resided in the town close to the scene of the dream,
informing him that his tenant had been found on Tuesday morning at Major
N.M.'s gate, speechless and apparently dying from a fracture of the
skull, and that there was no trace of the murderers.

"That night A. started for the town, and arrived there on Thursday
morning. On his way to a meeting of magistrates, he met the senior
magistrate of that part of the country, and requested him to give orders
for the arrest of the three men whom, besides H.W., he had recognized in
his dream, and to have them examined separately. This was at once done.
The three men gave identical accounts of the occurrence, and all named the
woman who was with them. She was then arrested and gave precisely similar
testimony. They said that between eleven and twelve on the Monday night
they had been walking homewards altogether along the road, when they were
overtaken by three strangers, two of whom savagely assaulted H.W., while
the other prevented his friends from interfering. H.W. did not die, but
was never the same man afterwards; he subsequently emigrated."

Stead, the English editor and psychical researcher, relates the following
case, which he accepts as truthful and correct, after careful
investigation of the circumstances and of the character and reputation of
the person relating it. The story proceeds as follows:

"St. Eglos is situated about ten miles from the Atlantic, and not quite so
far from the old market town of Trebodwina. Hart and George Northey were
brothers, and from childhood their lives had been marked by the strongest
brotherly affection. Hart and George Northey had never been separated
from their birth until George became a sailor, Hart meantime joining his
father in business. On the 8th of February, 1840, while George Northey's
ship was lying in port at St. Helena, he had the following strange dream:

"Last night I dreamt that my brother was at Trebodwina Market, and that I
was with him, quite close by his side, during the whole of the market
transactions. Although I could see and hear which passed around me, I felt
sure that it was not my bodily presence which thus accompanied him, but my
shadow or rather my spiritual presence, for he seemed quite unconscious
that I was near him. I felt that my being thus present in this strange way
betokened some hidden danger which he was destined to meet, and which I
know my presence could not avert, for I could not speak to warn him of his
peril."

The story then proceeds to relate how Hart collected considerable money at
Trebodwina Market, and then started to ride homeward. George tells what
happened to his brother on the way, as follows:

"My terror gradually increased as Hart approached the hamlet of Polkerrow,
until I was in a perfect frenzy, frantically desirous, yet unable to warn
my brother in some way and prevent him from going further. I suddenly
became aware of two dark shadows thrown across the road. I felt that my
brother's hour had come, and I was powerless to aid him! Two men appeared,
whom I instantly recognized as notorious poachers who lived in a lonely
wood near St. Eglos. They wished him 'Good night, mister!' civilly
enough. He replied, and entered into conversation with them about some
work he had promised them. After a few minutes they asked him for some
money. The elder of the two brothers, who was standing near the horse's
head, said: 'Mr. Northey, we know you have just come from Trebodwina
Market with plenty of money in your pockets; we are desperate men, and you
bean't going to leave this place until we've got that money; so hand
over!' My brother made no reply except to slash at him with the whip, and
spur the horse at him.

"The younger of the ruffians instantly drew a pistol, and fired. Hart
dropped lifeless from the saddle, and one of the villains held him by the
throat with a grip of iron for some minutes, as thought to make assurance
doubly sure, and crush out any particle of life my poor brother might have
left. The murderers secured the horse to a tree in the orchard, and,
having rifled the corpse, they dragged it up the stream, concealing it
under the overhanging banks of the water-course. Then they carefully
covered over all marks of blood on the road, and hid the pistol in the
thatch of a disused hut close to the roadside; then, setting the horse
free to gallop home alone, they decamped across the country to their own
cottage."

The story then relates how George Northey's vessel left St. Helena the
next day after the dream, and reached Plymouth in due time. George carried
with him a very vivid recollection of his vision on the return voyage,
and never doubted for an instant that his brother had been actually
murdered in the manner and by the persons named, as seen in the vision. He
carried with him the determination to bring the villains to justice and
was filled with the conviction that through his efforts retribution would
fall upon the murderers.

In England, justice was at work--but the missing link was needed. The
crime aroused universal horror and indignation, and the authorities left
nothing undone in the direction of discovering the murderers and bringing
them to justice. Two brothers named Hightwood were suspected, and in their
cottage were found blood-stained garments. But no pistol was found,
although the younger brother admitted having owned but lost one. They were
arrested and brought before the magistrates. The evidence against them was
purely circumstantial, and not any too strong at that; but their actions
were those of guilty men. They were committed for trial. Each confessed,
in hopes of saving his life and obtaining imprisonment instead. But both
were convicted and sentenced to be hanged. There was doubt in the minds of
some, however, about the pistol. The story continues:

"Before the execution, George Northey arrived from St. Helena, and
declared that the pistol was in the thatch of the old cottage close by the
place where they had murdered Hart Northey, and where they had hid it.
'How do you know?' he was asked. George replied: 'I saw the foul deed
committed in a dream I had the night of the murder, when at St. Helena.'
The pistol was found, as George Northey had predicted, in the thatch of
the ruined cottage." Investigation revealed that the details of the crime
were identical with those seen in the vision.

It is a fact known to all occultists that many persons frequently travel
in the astral body during sleep; and in many cases retain a faint
recollection of some of the things they have seen and heard during their
travels in the astral. Nearly everyone knows the experience of waking up
in the morning feeling physically tired and "used up;" in some cases a dim
recollection of walking or working during the dream being had. Who among
us has not had the experience of "walking on the air," or in the air,
without the feet touching the ground, being propelled simply by the effort
of the will? And who of us has had not experienced that dreadful--"falling
through space" sensation, in dreams, with the sudden awakening just before
we actually struck earth? And who has not had the mortifying dream
experience of walking along the street, or in some public place, and being
suddenly overcome by the consciousness that we were in our night-clothes,
or perhaps without any clothing at all? All of these things are more or
less distorted recollection of astral journeyings.

But while these dream excursions in the astral are harmless, the conscious
"going out in the astral" is not so. There are many planes of the astral
into which it is dangerous and unpleasant for the uninstructed person to
travel; unless accompanied by a capable occultist as guide. Therefore, I
caution all students against trying to force development in that
direction. Nature surrounds you with safeguards, and interposes obstacles
for your own protection and good. Do not try to break through these
obstacles without knowledge of what you are doing. "Fools rush in where
angels fear to tread," remember; and "a little learning is a dangerous
thing." When you have reached the stage of development in which it will be
safe for you to undertake conscious astral explorations, then will your
guide be at hand, and the instruction furnished you by those capable of
giving it to you. Do not try to break into the astral without due
preparation, and full knowledge, lest you find yourself in the state of
the fish who leaped out of the water onto the banks of the stream. Your
dream trips are safe; they will increase in variety and clearness, and you
will remember more about them--all this before you may begin to try to
consciously "go out into the astral" as do the occultists. Be content to
crawl before you may walk. Learn to add, multiply, subtract and divide,
before you undertake the higher mathematics, algebra, geometry, etc., of
occultism.




LESSON XV.

STRANGE ASTRAL PHENOMENA.


There are several phases of astral phenomena other than those mentioned in
the preceding chapters, which it will be better for the student to become
acquainted with in order to round out his general knowledge of the
subject, although the manifestations are comparatively rare, and not so
generally recognized in works on this subject.

One of the first of these several phases of astral phenomena is that which
may be called Thought-Form Projection. This manifestation comes in the
place on the psychic scale just between ordinary clairvoyance on the one
hand, and astral body projection on the other. It has some of the
characteristics of each, and is often mistaken for one or the other of
these phases.

To understand this phenomena, the student should know something regarding
the fact that thought frequently takes on astral form, and that these
manifestations are known as thought-forms. I have spoken of these in some
of the preceding lessons. The ordinary thought-form is quite simple, as a
rule, and does not bear any particular resemblance to the sender thereof.
But in some cases a person may, consciously or unconsciously, strongly and
clearly think of himself as present at some other place, and thus actually
create a thought-form of himself at that place, which may be discerned by
those having clairvoyant vision. Moreover, this thought-form of himself
is connected psychically with himself and affords a channel of psychic
information for him. As a rule these thought-forms are only projected by
those who have trained their minds and will along occult lines; but
occasionally under the stress of strong emotion or desire an ordinary
person may focus his psychic power to such an extent that the phenomena is
manifested.

Here I will quote from an English investigator of astral phenomena, who
has had much experience on that plane. He says: "All students are aware
that thought takes form, at any rate upon its own plane, and in the
majority of cases upon the astral plane also; but it may not be so
generally known that if a man thinks strongly of himself as present at any
given place, the form assumed by that particular thought will be a
likeness of the thinker himself, which will appear at the place in
question. Essentially this form must be composed of the matter of the
mental plane, but in very many cases it would draw round itself matter of
the astral plane also, and so would approach much nearer to visibility.
There are, in fact, many instances in which it has been seen by the person
thought of--most probably by means of the unconscious influence emanating
from the original thinker. None of the consciousness of the thinker would,
however, be included within this thought-form. When once sent out from
him, it would normally be a quite separate entity--not indeed absolutely
unconnected with its maker, but practically so as far as the possibility
of receiving any impression through it is concerned.

"This type of clairvoyance consists, then, in the power to retain so much
connection with and so much hold over a newly-created thought-form as will
render it possible to receive impressions by means of it. Such impressions
as were made upon the form would in this case be transmitted to the
thinker--not along an astral telegraph line, but by a sympathetic
vibration. In a perfect case of this kind of clairvoyance it is almost as
though the seer projected a part of his consciousness into the
thought-form, and used it as a kind of outpost, from which observation was
possible. He sees almost as well as he would if he himself stood in the
place of his thought-form. The figures at which he is looking will appear
to him as of life-size and close to hand, instead of tiny and at a
distance as in the case of some other forms of clairvoyance; and he will
find it possible to shift his point of view if he wishes to do so.
Clairaudience is perhaps less frequently associated with this type of
clairvoyance than with the others, but its place is to some extent taken
by a kind of mental perception of the thoughts and intentions of those who
are seen.

"Since the man's consciousness is still in the physical body, he will be
able (even when exercising this faculty) to hear and to speak, in so far
as he can do this without any distraction of his attention. The moment
that the intentness of his thought fails, the whole vision is gone, and he
will have to construct a fresh thought-form before he can resume it.
Instances in which this kind of sight is possessed with any degree of
perfection by untrained people are naturally rarer than in the other types
of clairvoyance, because the capacity for mental control required, and the
generally finer nature of the forces employed."

I may mention that this particular method is frequently employed by
advanced occultists of all countries, being preferred for various reasons.
Some of the reasons of this preference as follows: (a) The ability to
shift the vision, and to turn around almost as well as in the case of
actual astral-body projection--this gives quite an advantage to this
method over the method of ordinary clairvoyance; (b) it does away with
certain disadvantages of "going out into the astral" in the astral-body,
which only trained occultists realize--it gives almost the same results as
astral-body clairvoyance, without a number of disadvantages and
inconveniences.

In India, especially, this form of clairvoyance is comparatively frequent.
This by reason of the fact that the Hindus, as a race, are far more
psychic than are those of the Western lands, all else considered; and,
besides, there are a much greater number of highly developed occultists
there than in the West. Moreover, there is a certain psychic atmosphere
surrounding India, by reason of its thousands of years of deep interest in
things psychic and spiritual, all of which renders the production of
psychic phenomena far easier than in other lands.

In India, moreover, we find many instances of another form of psychic, or
astral phenomena. I allude to the production of thought-form pictures
which are plainly visible to one or more persons. This phase of psychic
phenomena is the real basis for many of the wonder tales which Western
travellers bring back with them from India. The wonderful cases of magical
appearance of living creatures and plants, and other objects, out of the
clear air are the result of this psychic phenomena. That is to say, the
creatures and objects are not really produced--they are but astral
appearances resulting from the projection of powerful thought-forms from
the mind of the magician or other wonder-worker, of whom India has a
plentiful supply. Even the ignorant fakirs (I use the word in its true
sense, not in the sense given it by American slang)--even these itinerant
showmen of psychic phenomena, are able to produce phenomena of this kind
which seems miraculous to those witnessing them. As for the trained
occultists of India, I may say that their feats (when they deign to
produce them) seem to overturn every theory and principle of materialistic
philosophy and science. But in nearly every case the explanation is the
same--the projection of a strong and clear thought-form on a large scale.

Although I have purposely omitted reference to Hindu psychic phenomena in
this book (for the reason given in my Introduction), I find it necessary
to quote cases in India in this connection, for the simple reason that
there are but few counterparts in the Western world. There are no
itinerent wonder-workers of this kind in Western lands, and the trained
occultists of the West of course would not consent to perform feats of
this kind for the amusement of persons seeking merely sensations. The
trained wills of the West are given rather to materializing objectively on
the physical plane, creating great railroads, buildings, bridges, etc.,
from the mental pictures, rather than devoting the same time, energy and
will to the production of astral though-forms and pictures. There is a
great difference in temperament, as well as a difference in the general
psychic atmosphere, between East and West, which serves to explain matters
of this kind.

An American writer truly says: "The first principle underlying the whole
business of Hindu wonder-working is that of a strong will; and the first
necessary condition of producing a magical effect is an increase in the
power of thought. The Hindus, owing to that intense love for solitary
meditation, which has been one of the most pronounced characteristics from
time immemorial, have acquired mental faculties of which we of the Western
and younger civilization are totally ignorant. The Hindu has attained a
past master's degree in speculative philosophy. He has for years retired
for meditation to the silent places in his land, lived a hermit, subdued
the body and developed the mind, thus winning control over other minds."

In India, I have seen scenes of far distant places appearing as a mirage
in clear air, even the colors being present to the scenes. This, though
some what uncommon, was simply a remarkable instance of thought-form
projection from the mind of a man highly developed along occult lines. You
must remember that in order to produce a picture in the astral, of this
kind, the occultist must not only have the power of will and mind to cause
such a picture to materialize, but he must also have a remarkable memory
for detail in the picture--for nothing appears in the picture unless it
has already been pictured in the mind of the mind of the man himself. Such
a memory and perception of detail is very rare--in the Western world it is
possessed by only exceptional artists; however, anyone may cultivate this
perception and memory if he will give the time and care to it that the
Hindu magicians do.

You have heard of the Hindu Mango Trick, in which the magician takes a
mango seed, plants it in the ground, waves his hands over it, and then
causes first a tiny shoot to appear from the surface of the ground, this
followed by a tiny trunk, and leaves, which grow and grow, until at last
appears a full sized mango tree, which first shows blossoms and then ripe
fruit. In short, in a few moments the magician has produced that which
Nature require years to do--that is he apparently does this. What he
really does is to produce a wonderful thought-form in the astral, from
seed stage to tree and fruit stage; the astral picture reproducing
perfectly the picture in his own mind. It is as if he were creating a
moving picture film-roll in his mind, and then projecting this upon the
screen of the air. There is no mango tree there, and never was, outside
of the mind of the magician and the minds of his audience.

In the same way, the magician will seem to throw the end of a rope up into
the air. It travels far up until the end is lost sight of. Then he sends a
boy climbing up after it, until he too disappears from sight. Then he
causes the whole thing to disappear, and lo! the boy is seen standing
among the audience. The boy is real, of course, but he never left the
spot--the rest was all an appearance caused by the mind and will of the
magician, pictured in the astral as a thought-form. In the same way the
magician will seem to cut the boy into bits, and then cause the severed
parts to spring together and reassemble themselves. These feats may be
varied indefinitely but the principle is ever the same--thought-form
projection.

Western visitors have sought to obtain photographs of these feats of the
Hindu magicians, but their plates and films invariably show nothing
whatever except the old fakir sitting quietly in the centre, with a
peculiar expression in his eyes. This is as might be expected, for the
picture exists only in the astral, and is perceived only by the awakened
astral senses of those present, which have been stimulated into activity
by the power of the magician--by sympathetic vibration, to be exact.
Moreover, in certain instances it has been found that the vision is
confined to a limited area; persons outside of the limit-ring see nothing,
and those moving nearer to the magician lose sight of what they had
previously seen. There are scientific reasons for this last fact, which
need not be gone into at this place. The main point I am seeking to bring
out is that these wonderful scenes are simply and wholly thought-form
pictures in the astral, perceived by the awakened astral vision of those
present. This to be sure is wonderful enough--but still no miracle has
been worked!

I may mention here that these magicians begin their training from early
youth. In addition to certain instruction concerning astral phenomena
which is handed down from father to son among them they are set to work
practicing "visualization" of things previously perceived. They are set to
work upon, say, a rose. They must impress upon their memory the perfect
picture of the rose--no easy matter, I may tell you. Then they proceed to
more difficult objects, slowly and gradually, along well known principles
of memory development. Along with this they practice the art of
reproducing that which they remember--projecting it in thought-form state.
And so the young magician proceeds, from simple to complex things; from
easy to difficult; until, finally, he is pronounced fit to give public
exhibitions. All this takes years and years--sometimes the boy grows to be
a middle-aged man before he is allowed to publicly exhibit his power.
Imagine a Western boy or man being willing to study from early childhood
to middle-age before he may hope to be able to show what he has been
learning! Verily "the East is East, and the West is West"--the two poles
of human activity and expression.

Another phase of psychic astral phenomena which should be mentioned,
although it is manifested but comparatively seldom, is that which has been
called "Telekinesis." By the term "telekinesis" is meant that class of
phenomena which manifests in the movement of physical objects without
physical contact with the person responsible for the movement. I
understand that the term itself was coined by Professor Cowes, with whose
works I am not personally familiar. It is derived from the two Greek words
TELE, meaning "far off," and KINESIS, meaning "to move."

This class of phenomena is known better in the Western world by reason of
its manifestation in spiritualistic circles in the movement of tables,
etc.; the knocking or tapping on tables and doors, etc.; all of which are
usually attributed to the work of "spirits," but which occultists know are
generally produced, consciously or unconsciously, by means of the power in
the medium or others present, sometimes both. I would say here that I am
not trying to discredit genuine spiritualistic phenomena--I am not
considering the same in these lessons. All that I wish to say is that many
of the phenomena commonly attributed to "spirits" are really but results
of the psychic forces inherent in the living human being.

Under certain conditions there may appear in the case of a person strongly
psychic, and also strongly charged with prana, the ability to extend a
portion of the astral body to a considerable distance, and to there
produce an effect upon some physical object. Those with strong clairvoyant
vision may actually perceive this astral extension, under favorable
circumstances. They perceive the astral arm of the person stretching out,
diminishing in size as it extends (just as a piece of flexible rubber
shrinks in diameter as it expands in length) and finally coming in contact
with the physical object it wishes to move or strike. Then is seen a
strong flow of prana along its length, which (by a peculiar form of
concentration) is able to produce the physical effect. I cannot enter into
the subject of astral physics at this place, for the subject is far too
technical to be treated in lessons designed for general study. I may at
least partially explain the phenomenon, however, by saying that the
projected astral arm acts in a manner almost precisely like that of an
extended physical arm, were such a thing possible in nature.

This astral-body extension produces spirit raps on tables; table-tilting
and movement; levitation, or the lifting of solid objects in the air;
playing upon musical instruments such as the guitar, accordian, etc. In
some cases it is able to actually lift the person himself from the floor,
and carry him through the air, in the same way. It may also cause the
movement of a pencil in a closed slate, or bit of chalk upon a blackboard.
In fact, it may produce almost any form of movement possible to the
physical hand. In the case of the levitation of the person himself, the
astral arms, and sometimes the legs as well, extend to the floor and push
up the physical body into the air, and then propel it along. There are
many complex technical details to these manifestations, however, and in a
general statement these must be omitted.

Some who are firmly wedded to the spiritistic theory resent the statement
of occultists that this form of phenomena may be explained without the
necessity of the "spirits." But the best ground for the statement of the
occultists is that many advanced occultists are able to produce such
phenomena, consciously, by an act of pure will, accompanied by the power
of mental picturing. They first picture the astral extension, and then
will the projection of the astral and the passage of the prana (or vital
force) around the pattern of the mental image. In the case of some very
highly developed occultists the astral thought-form of their body becomes
so charged with prana that it is able to move physical objects. There are
not mere theories, for they may be verified by any occultist of
sufficiently high development.

I do not wish to intimate that the mediums are aware of the true nature of
this phenomena, and consciously deceive their followers. On the contrary,
most of them firmly believe that it is the "spirits" who do the work;
unaware that they are unconsciously projecting their astral bodies,
charged with prana, and performing the feat themselves. The best mediums,
however, will generally tell you that they strongly "wish" that the thing
be done, and a little cross-examination will reveal the fact that they
generally make a clear mental picture of the actual happening just before
it occurs. As I have already stated, however, the best proof is the fact
that advanced occultists are able to duplicate the phenomena deliberately,
consciously, and at will. I do not think that detracts from the wonder and
interest in the so-called "spiritistic" phenomena; on the contrary, I
think that it adds to it.

Again invading the realm of the "spirits," I would say that occultists
know that many cases of so-called materialization of "spirit-forms" take
place by reason of the unconscious projection of the astral body of the
medium. Moreover, such a projection of the astral body may take on the
appearance of some departed soul, by reason of the mental picture of that
person in the mind of the medium. But, it may be asked if the medium has
never seen the dead person, how can he or she make a mental picture of him
or her. The answer is that the minds of the persons present who knew the
dead person tend to influence the appearance of the nebulous spirit form.
In fact, in most cases the medium is unable to produce the phenomenon
without the psychic assistance of those in the circle. In this case, also,
I would say that the advanced occultist is able to duplicate the phenomena
at will, as all who have enjoyed the privilege of close acquaintance with
such persons are aware.

The fact the medium is usually in a trance condition aid materially in the
ease with which the phenomena are produced. With the conscious mind
stilled, and the subconscious mind active, the astral phenomena are
produced with much less trouble than would be the case if the medium were
in the ordinary condition.

Now, I wish to impress upon the minds of those of my readers who have a
strong sympathy for the spiritistic teachings that I recognize the
validity and genuineness of much of the phenomena of spiritism--I know
these things to be true, for that matter; it is not a matter of mere
belief on my part. But I also know that much of the so-called spiritistic
phenomena is possible without the aid of "spirits," but by, the employment
of the psychic astral forces and powers as stated in these lessons. I see
no reason for any honest investigator of spiritism to be offended at such
statements, for it does not take away from the wonder of the phenomena;
and does not discredit the motives and power of the mediums. We must
search for truth wherever it is to be found; and we must not seek to dodge
the results of our investigations. There is too much wonderful phenomena
in spiritism to begrudge the explanation that the occultist offers for
certain of its phases.

While I am on the subject of materialization however, I would direct the
attention of the student to my little book entitled "The Astral World," in
which I have explained briefly the phenomena of those planes of the astral
in which dwell the cast-off shells of souls which have moved on to the
higher planes of the great astral world. I have there shown that many
astral shells or shades, or other astral semi-entities may be
materialized, and thus mistaken for the "spirits" of departed friends. I
have also explained in the same little book how there are certain powerful
thought-forms which may be mistaken for spirit materializations. I have
also shown how many a honest medium is really a good clairvoyant, and by
reading the records of the astral light is able to give information which
seems to come from the departed soul. All of these things should be
familiar to the earnest investigator of spiritism, in order that he may be
able to classify the phenomena which he witnesses, and to avoid error and
disappointment.

In this connection, before passing on to the consideration of other phases
of psychic phenomena, I would say that one of the best mediums known to
the modern Western world--a medium who has been consulted by eminent men,
university professors, psychologists, and others--and whose revelations
regarding past, present and future astounded careful and intelligent men
of international reputation--this medium at the height of her professional
success made a public announcement that she felt compelled, from
conscientious motives, to assert that she had come to the conclusion that
her message came not from departed "spirits" but rather from some unknown
realm of being, brought hither by the exercise of some faculty inherent in
her and developed to a high power in her for some reason, which power seem
to manifest more effectively when she shut off her ordinary physical
faculties and functioned on a plane higher than them. I think that the
student of the present lessons will be able to point out the nature of the
phenomena manifested by this medium, and also the source of her power. If
not, I shall feel disappointed at my work of instruction.




LESSON XVI.

PSYCHIC INFLUENCE; ITS LAWS AND PRINCIPLES


One of the phases of psychic phenomena that actively engage the attention
of the student from the very beginning is that which may be called Psychic
Influence. By this term is meant the influencing of one mind by
another--the effect of one mind over another. There has been much written
and said on this phase of the general subject in recent years, but few
writers, however, have gone deeply into the matter.

In the first place, most of the writers on the subject seek to explain the
whole thing by means of ordinary telepathy. But this is merely a one-sided
view of the truth of the matter. For, while ordinary telepathy plays an
important part in the phenomena, still the higher form of telepathy, i.e.,
astral thought-transference, is frequently involved. The student who has
followed me in the preceding lessons will understand readily what I mean
when I say this, so there is no necessity for repetition on this point at
this place.

At this point, however, I must ask the student to consider the idea of
psychic vibrations and their inductive power. It is a great principle of
occultism, as well as of modern science, that everything is in a state of
vibration--everything has its own rate of vibration, and is constantly
manifesting it. Every mental state is accompanied by vibration of its own
plane: every emotional state or feeling has its own particular rate of
vibration. These rates of vibrations manifest just as do the vibrations of
musical sound which produce the several notes on the scale, one rising
above the other in rate of vibration. But the scale of mental and
emotional states is far more complex, and far more extended than is the
musical scale; there are thousands of different notes, and half-notes, on
the mental scale. There are harmonies and discords on that scale, also.

To those to whom vibrations seem to be something merely connected with
sound-waves, etc., I would say that a general and hasty glance at some
elementary work on physical science will show that even the different
shades, hues and tints of the colors perceived by us arise from different
rates of vibrations. Color is nothing more than the result of certain
rates of vibrations of light recorded by our senses and interpreted by our
minds. From the low vibrations of red to the high vibrations of violet,
all the various colors of the spectrum have their own particular rate of
vibration. And, more than this, science knows that below the lowest red
vibrations, and above the highest violet vibrations, there are other
vibrations which our senses are unable to record, but which scientific
instruments register. The rays of light by which photographs are taken are
not perceived by the eye. There are a number of so-called chemical rays of
light which the eye does not perceive, but which may be caught by delicate
instruments. There is what science has called "dark light," which will
photograph in a room which appears pitch dark to the human sight.

Above the ordinary scale of light vibrations are the vibrations of the
X-Rays and other fine forces--these are not perceived by the eye, but are
caught by delicate instruments and recorded. Moreover, though science has
not as yet discovered the fact, occultists know that the vibrations of
mental and emotional states are just as true and regular as are those of
sound or light, or heat. Again, above the plane of the physical vibrations
arising from the brain and nervous system, there are the vibrations of the
astral counterparts of these, which are much higher in the scale. For even
the astral faculties and organs, while above the physical, still are under
the universal rule of vibration, and have their own rate thereof. The old
occult axiom: "As above, so below; as below, so above" is always seen to
work out on all planes of universal energy.

Closely following this idea of the universality of vibrations, and
intimately connected therewith, we have the principle of "induction,"
which is likewise universal, and found manifesting on all planes of
energy. "What is induction?" you may ask. Well, it is very simple, or very
complex--just as you may look at it. The principle of induction (on any
plane) is that inherent quality or attribute of energy by which the
manifestation of energy tends to reproduce itself in a second object, by
setting up corresponding vibrations therein, though without direct contact
of the two objects.

Thus, heat in one object tends to induce heat in another object within
its range of induction--the heated object "throws off" heat vibrations
which set up corresponding vibrations in the near-by second object and
make it hot. Likewise, the vibrations of light striking upon other objects
render them capable of radiating light. Again, a magnet will induce
magnetism in a piece of steel suspended nearby, though the two objects do
not actually touch, each other. An object which is electrified will by
induction electrify another object situated some distance away. A note
sounded on the piano, or violin, will cause a glass or vase in some
distant part of the room to vibrate and "sing," under certain conditions.
And, so on, in every form or phase of the manifestation of energy do we
see the principle of induction in full operation and manifestation.

On the plane of ordinary thought and emotion, we find many instances of
this principle of induction. We know that one person vibrating strongly
with happiness or sorrow, cheerfulness or anger, as the case may be fends
to communicate his feeling and emotions, state to those with whom he comes
in contact. All of you have seen a whole room full of persons affected and
influenced in this way, under certain circumstances. You have also seen
how a magnetic orator, preacher, singer or actor is able to induce in his
audience a state of emotional vibration corresponding to that manifested
by himself. In the same manner the "mental atmospheres" of towns, cities,
etc., are induced.

A well-known writer on this subject has truthfully told us: "We all know
how great waves of feeling spread over a town, city or country, sweeping
people off their balance. Great waves of political enthusiasm, or
war-spirit, or prejudice for or against certain persons, sweep over places
and cause men to act in a manner that they will afterward regret when they
come to themselves and consider their acts in cold blood. They will be
swayed by demagogues or magnetic leaders who wish to gain their votes or
patronage; and they will be led into acts of mob violence, or similar
atrocities, by yielding to these waves of contagious thought. On the other
hand, we all know how great waves of religious feeling sweep over a
community upon the occasion of some great 'revival' excitement or fervor."

These things being perceived, and recognized as true, the next question
that presents itself to the mind of the intelligent student is this: "But
what causes the difference in power and effect between the thought and
feeling-vibrations of different persons?" This question is a valid one,
and arises from a perception of the underlying variety and difference in
the thought vibrations of different persons. The difference, my students,
is caused by three principal facts, viz., (1) difference in degree of
feeling; (2) difference in degree of visualization; and (3) difference in
degree of concentration. Let us examine each of these successively, so as
to get at the underlying principle.

The element of emotional feeling is like the element of fire in the
production of steam. The more vivid and intense the feeling or emotion,
the greater the degree of heat and force to the thought wave or vibratory
stream projected. You will begin to see why the thought vibrations of
those animated and filled with strong desire, strong wish, strong
ambition, etc., must be more forceful than those of persons of the
opposite type.

The person who is filled with a strong desire, wish or ambition, which has
been fanned into a fierce blaze by attention, is a dynamic power among
other persons, and his influence is felt. In fact, it may be asserted that
as a general rule no person is able to influence men and things unless he
have a strong desire, wish or ambition within him. The power of desire is
a wonderful one, as all occultists know, and it will accomplish much even
if the other elements be lacking; while, in proper combination with other
principles it will accomplish wonders. Likewise, a strong interest in a
thing will cause a certain strength to the thought-vibrations connected
therewith. Interest is really an emotional feeling, though we generally
think of it as merely something connected with the intellect. A cold
intellectual thought has very little force, unless backed up by strong
interest and concentration. But any intellectual thought backed up with
interest, and focused by concentration, will produce very strong thought
vibrations, with a marked inductive power.

Now, let us consider the subject of visualization. Every person knows that
the person who wishes to accomplish anything, or who expects to do good
work along any line, must first know what he wishes to accomplish. In the
degree that he is able to see the thing in his mind's eye--to picture the
thing in his imagination--in that degree will he tend to manifest the
thing itself in material form and effect.

Sir Francis Galton, an eminent authority upon psychology, says on this
point: "The free use of a high visualizing faculty is of much importance
in connection with the higher processes of generalized thought. A visual
image is the most perfect form of mental representation wherever the
shape, position, and relations of objects to space are concerned. The best
workmen are those who visualize the whole of what they propose to do
before they take a tool in their hands. Strategists, artists of all
denominations, physicists who contrive new experiments, and, in short, all
who do not follow routine, have need of it. A faculty that is of
importance in all technical and artistic occupations, that gives accuracy
to our perceptions and justice to our generalizations, is starved by lazy
disuse instead of being cultivated judiciously in such a way as will, on
the whole, bring best return. I believe that a serious study of the best
way of developing and utilizing this faculty, without prejudice to the
practice of abstract thought in symbols, is one of the pressing desirata
in the yet unformed science of education."

Not only on the ordinary planes is the forming of strong mental images
important and useful, but when we come to consider the phenomena of the
astral plane we begin to see what an important part is played there by
strong mental images or visualized ideas. The better you know what you
desire, wish or aspire to, the stronger will be your thought vibrations of
that thing, of course. Well, then, the stronger that you are able to
picture the thing in your mind--to visualize it to yourself--the stronger
will be your actual knowledge and thought-form of that thing. Instead of
your thought vibrations being grouped in nebulous forms, lacking shape and
distinct figure, as in the ordinary case; when you form strong, clear
mental images of what you desire or wish to accomplish, then do the
thought vibrations group themselves in clear, strong distinct forms. This
being done, when the mind of other persons are affected by induction they
get the clear idea of the thought and feeling in your mind, and are
strongly influenced thereby.

A little later on, I shall call your attention to the Attractive Power of
Thought. But at this point I wish to say to you that while thought
certainly attracts to you the things that you think of the most, still the
power of the attraction depends very materially upon the clearness and
distinctness of the mental image, or thought visualization, of the desired
thing that you have set up in your mind. The nearer you can actually see
the thing as you wish it to happen, even to the general details, the
stronger will be the attractive force thereof. But, I shall leave the
discussion of this phase of the subject until I reach it in its proper
order. For the present, I shall content myself with urging upon you the
importance of a clear mental image, or visualized thought, in the matter
of giving force and direction to the idea induced in the minds of other
persons. In order for the other persons to actually perceive clearly the
idea or feeling induced in them, it is necessary that the idea or feeling
be strongly visualized in the mind originating it; that is the whole thing
in one sentence.

The next point of importance in thought-influence by induction, is that
which is concerned with the process of concentration. Concentration is the
act of mental focusing, or bringing to a single point or centre. It is
like the work of the sun-glass that converges the rays of the sun to a
single tiny point, thus immensely increasing its heat and power. Or, it is
like the fine point of a needle that will force its way through where a
blunt thing cannot penetrate. Or, it is like the strongly concentrated
essence of a chemical substance, of which one drop is as powerful as one
pint of the original thing. Think of the concentrated power of a tiny drop
of attar of roses--it has within its tiny space the concentrated odor of
thousands of roses; one drop of it will make a pint of extract, and a
gallon of weaker perfumery! Think of the concentrated power in a lightning
flash, as contrasted with the same amount of electricity diffused over a
large area. Or, think of the harmless flash of a small amount of gunpowder
ignited in the open air, as contrasted with the ignition of the same
amount of powder compelled to escape through the small opening in the
gun-barrel.

The occult teachings lay great stress upon this power of mental
concentration. All students of the occult devote much time and care to the
cultivation of the powers of concentration, and the development of the
ability to employ them. The average person possesses but a very small
amount of concentration, and is able to concentrate his mind for but a few
moments at a time. The trained thinker obtains much of his mental power
from his acquired ability to concentrate on his task. The occultist trains
himself in fixing his concentrated attention upon the matter before him,
so as to bring to a focal centre all of his mental forces.

The mind is a very restless thing, and is inclined to dance from one thing
to another, tiring of each thing after a few moment's consideration
thereof. The average person allows his involuntary attention to rest upon
every trifling thing, and to be distracted by the idlest appeals to the
senses. He finds it most difficult to either shut out these distracting
appeals to the senses, and equally hard to hold the attention to some
uninteresting thing. His attention is almost free of control by the will,
and the person is a slave to his perceptive powers and to his imagination,
instead of, being a master of both.

The occultist, on the contrary, masters his attention, and controls his
imagination. He forces the one to concentrate when he wishes it to do so;
and he compels the latter to form the mental images he wishes to
visualize. But this a far different thing from the self-hypnotization
which some persons imagine to be concentration. A writer on the subject
has well said: "The trained occultist will concentrate upon a subject or
object with a wonderful intensity, seemingly completely absorbed in the
subject or object before him, and oblivious to all else in the world. And
yet, the task accomplished, or the given time expired, he will detach his
mind from the object and will be perfectly fresh, watchful and wide-awake
to the next matter before him. There is every difference between being
controlled by involuntary attention, which is species of
self-hypnotization, and the control of the attention, which is an evidence
of mastery." An eminent French psychologist once said: "The authority of
the attention is subject to the superior authority of the Ego. I yield it,
or I withhold it, as I please. I direct it in turn to several points. I
concentrate it upon each point, as long as my will can stand the effort."

In an earlier lesson of this series, I have indicated in a general way the
methods whereby one may develop and train his powers of concentration.
There is no royal road to concentration; it may be developed only by
practice and exercise. The secret consists in managing the attention, so
as to fix it upon a subject, no matter how uninteresting; and to hold it
there for a reasonable length of time. Practice upon some disagreeable
study or other task is good exercise, for it serves to train the will in
spite of the influence of more attractive objects or subjects. And this
all serves to train the will, remember; for the will is actively concerned
in every act of voluntary attention. In fact, attention of this kind is
one of the most important and characteristic acts of the will.

So, as you see, in order to be successful in influencing the minds of
others by means of mental induction, you must first cultivate a strong
feeling of interest in the idea which you wish to induce in the other
person, or a strong desire to produce the thing. Interest and desire
constitute the fire which generates the stream of will from the water of
mind, as some occultists have stated it. Secondly, you must cultivate the
faculty of forming strong and clear mental images of the idea or feeling
you wish to so induce; you must learn to actually "see" the thing in your
imagination, so as to give the idea strength and clearness. Thirdly, you
must learn to concentrate your mind and attention upon the idea or
feeling, shutting out all other ideas and feelings for the time being;
thus you give concentrated force and power to the vibrations and
thought-forms which you are projecting.

These three principles underlie all of the many forms of mental induction,
or mental influence. We find them in active operation in cases in which
the person is seeking to attract to himself certain conditions,
environment, persons, things, or channels of expression, by setting into
motion the great laws of mental attraction. We see them also employed when
the person is endeavoring to produce an effect upon the mind of some
particular person, or number of persons. We see them in force in all
cases of mental or psychic healing, under whatever form it may be
employed. In short, these are general principles, and must therefore
underlie all forms and phases of mental or psychic influence. The sooner
the student realizes this fact, and the more actively does he set himself
to work in cultivating and developing these principles within himself, the
more successful and efficient will he become in this field of psychic
research and investigation. It is largely in the degree of the cultivation
of these three mental principles that the occultist is distinguished from
the ordinary man.

It may be that you are not desirous of cultivating or practicing the power
of influencing other persons psychically. Well, that is for you to decide
for yourself. At any rate, you will do well to develop yourselves along
these lines, at least for self-protection. The cultivation of these three
mental principles will tend to make you active and positive, psychically,
as contrasted with the passive, negative mental state of the average
person. By becoming mentally active and positive you will be able to
resist any psychic influence that may be directed toward yourself, and to
surround yourself with a protective aura of positive, active mental
vibrations.

And, moreover, if you are desirous of pursuing your investigations of
psychic and astral phenomena, you will find it of great importance to
cultivate and develop these three principles in your mind. For, then you
will be able to brush aside all distracting influences, and to proceed at
once to the task before you, with power, clearness and strength of purpose
and method.

In the following chapters I shall give you a more or less detailed
presentation of the various phases or forms of psychic influence. Some of
these may seem at first to be something independent of the general
principles. But I ask that you carefully analyze all of these, so as to
discover that the same fundamental principles are under and back of each
and every instance presented. When you once fully grasp this fact, and
perfect yourselves in the few fundamental principles, then you are well
started on the road to mastery of all the various phases of psychic
phenomena. Instead of puzzling your mind over a hundred different phases
of disconnected phenomena, it is better to master the few actual
elementary principles, and then reason deductively from these to the
various manifestation thereof. Master the principles, and then learn to
apply them.




LESSON XVII.

PERSONAL PSYCHIC INFLUENCE OVER OTHERS


Psychic Influence, as the term is used in this book, may be said to be
divided into three general classes, viz., (1) Personal Influence, in which
the mind of another is directly influenced by induction while he is in the
presence of the person influencing; (2) Distant Influencing, in which the
psychic induction is directly manifested when the persons concerned are
distant from one another; and (3) Indirect Influence, in which the
induction is manifested in the minds of various persons coming in contact
with the thought vibrations of the person manifesting them, though no
attempt is made to directly influence any particular person. I shall now
present each of these three forms of psychic influence to you for
consideration, one after the other in the above order.

Personal Influence, as above defined, ranges from cases in which the
strongest control (generally known as hypnotism) is manifested, down to
the cases in which merely a slight influence is exerted. But the general
principle underlying all of these cases is precisely the same. The great
characters of history, such as Alexander the Great, Napoleon Bonaparte,
and Julius Caesar, manifested this power to a great degree, and were able
to sway men according to their will. All great leaders of men have this
power strongly manifested, else they would not be able to influence the
minds of men. Great orators, preachers, statesmen, and others of this
class, likewise manifest the power strongly. In fact, the very sign of
ability to influence and manage other persons is evidence of the
possession and manifestation of this mighty power.

In developing this power to influence others directly and personally, you
should begin by impressing upon your mind the principles stated in the
preceding chapter, namely (1) Strong Desire; (2) Clear Visualization; and
(3) Concentration.

You must begin by encouraging a strong desire in your mind to be a
positive individual; to exert and manifest a positive influence over
others with whom you come in contact, and especially over those whom you
wish to influence in some particular manner or direction. You must let the
fire of desire burn fiercely within you, until it becomes as strong as
physical hunger or thirst. You must "want to" as you want to breathe, to
live. You will find that the men who accomplish the great things in life
are those who have strong desire burning in their bosoms. There is a
strong radiative and inductive power in strong desire and wish--in fact,
some have thought this the main feature of what we generally call strong
will-power.

The next step, of course, is the forming of a clear, positive, distinct
and dynamic mental picture of the idea or feeling that you wish to induce
in the other person. If it is an idea, you should make a strong clear
picture of it in your imagination, so as to give it distinctness and
force and a clear outline. If it is a feeling, you should picture it in
your imagination. If it is something that you wish the other person to do,
or some way in which you wish him to act, you should picture him as doing
the thing, or acting in that particular way. By so doing you furnish the
pattern or design for the induced mental or emotional states you wish to
induce in the other person. Upon the clearness and strength of these
mental patterns of the imagination depends largely the power of the
induced impression.

The third step, of course, is the concentration of your mind upon the
impression you wish to induce in the mind of the other person. You must
learn to concentrate so forcibly and clearly that the idea will stand out
clearly in your mind like a bright star of a dark night, except that there
must be only one star instead of thousands. By so doing you really focus
the entire force of your mental and psychic energies into that one
particular idea or thought. This makes it act like the focused rays in the
sun-glass, or like the strong pipe-stream of water that will break down
the thing upon which it is turned. Diffused thought has but a
comparatively weak effect, whereas a concentrated stream of thought
vibrations will force its way through obstacles.

Remember, always, this threefold mental condition: (1) STRONG DESIRE; (2)
CLEAR MENTAL PICTURE; and (3) CONCENTRATED THOUGHT. The greater the degree
in which you can manifest these three mental conditions, the greater will
be your success in any form of psychic influence, direct or indirect,
personal or general, present or distant.

Before you proceed to develop the power to impress a particular idea or
feeling upon the mind of another person, you should first acquire a
positive mental atmosphere for yourself. This mental atmosphere is
produced in precisely the same way that you induce a special idea or
feeling in the mind of the other person. That is to say, you first
strongly desire it, then you clearly picture it, and then you apply
concentrated thought upon it.

I will assume that you are filled with the strong desire for a positive
mental atmosphere around you. You want this very much indeed, and actually
crave and hunger for it. Then you must begin to picture yourself (in your
imagination) as surrounded with an aura of positive thought-vibrations
which protect you from the thought forces of other persons, and, at the
same time impress the strength of your personality upon the persons with
whom you come in contact. You will be aided in making these strong mental
pictures by holding the idea in your concentrated thought, and, at the
same time, silently stating to your mind just what you expect to do in the
desired direction. In stating your orders to your mind, always speak as if
the thing were already accomplished at that particular moment. Never say
that it "will be," but always hold fast to the "it is." The following will
give you a good example of the mental statements, which of course should
be accompanied by the concentrated idea of the thing, and the mental
picture of yourself as being just what you state.

Here is the mental statement for the creation of a strong, positive
psychic atmosphere: "I am surrounded by an aura of strong, positive,
dynamic thought-vibrations. These render me positive to other persons, and
render them negative to me. I am positive of their thought-vibrations, but
they are negative to mine. They feel the strength of my psychic
atmosphere, while I easily repel the power of theirs. I dominate the
situation, and manifest my positive psychic qualities over theirs. My
atmosphere creates the vibration of strength and power on all sides of me,
which affect others with whom I come in contact. MY PSYCHIC ATMOSPHERE IS
STRONG AND POSITIVE!"

The next step in Personal Influence is that of projecting your psychic
power directly upon and into the mind of the other person whom you wish to
influence. Sometimes, if the person is quite negative to you, this is a
very simple and easy matter; but where the person is near your own degree
of psychic positiveness you will have to assert your psychic superiority
to him, and get the psychic "upper hand" before you can proceed further.
This is accomplished by throwing into your psychic atmosphere some
particularly strong mental statements accompanied by clear visualizations
or mental pictures.

Make positive your psychic atmosphere, particularly towards the person
whom you seek to influence, by statements and pictures something along
the following lines: "I am positive to this man"; "He is negative to me";
"He feels my power and is beginning to yield to it"; "He is unable to
influence me in the slightest, while I can influence him easily"; "My
power is beginning to operate upon his mind and feelings." The exact words
are not important, but the idea behind them gives them their psychic force
and power.

Then should you begin your direct attack upon him, or rather upon his
psychic powers. When I say "attack," I do not use the word in the sense of
warfare or actual desire to harm the other person--this is a far different
matter. What I mean to say is that there is usually a psychic battle for a
longer or shorter period between two persons of similar degrees of psychic
power and development. From this battle one always emerges victor at the
time, and one always is beaten for the time being, at least. And, as in
all battles, victory often goes to him who strikes the first hard blow.
The offensive tactics are the best in cases of this kind.

A celebrated American author, Oliver Wendall Holmes, in one of his books
makes mention of these duels of psychic force between individuals, as
follows: "There is that deadly Indian hug in which men wrestle with their
eyes, over in five seconds, but which breaks one of their two backs, and
is good for three-score years and ten, one trial enough--settles the whole
matter--just as when two feathered songsters of the barnyard, game and
dunghill, come together. After a jump or two, and a few sharp kicks, there
is an end to it; and it is 'After you, monsieur' with the beaten party in
all the social relations for all the rest of his days."

An English physician, Dr. Fothergill by name, wrote a number of years ago
about this struggle of wills, as he called it, but which is really a
struggle of psychic power. He says: "The conflict of will, the power to
command others, has been spoken of frequently. Yet what is this will-power
that influences others? What is it that makes us accept, and adopt too,
the advice of one person, while precisely the same advice from another has
been rejected? Is it the weight of force of will which insensibly
influences us; the force of will behind the advice? That is what it is!
The person who thus forces his or her advice upon us has no more power to
enforce it than others; but all the same we do as requested. We accept
from one what we reject from another. One person says of something
contemplated, 'Oh, but you must not,' yet we do it all the same, though
that person may be in a position to make us regret the rejection of that
counsel. Another person says, 'Oh, but you mustn't,' and we desist, though
we may, if so disposed, set this latter person's opinion at defiance with
impunity. It is not the fear of consequences, not of giving offense, which
determines the adaption of the latter person's advice, while it has been
rejected when given by the first. It depends upon the character or
will-power of the individual advising whether we accept the advice or
reject it. This character often depends little, if at all, in some cases,
upon the intellect, or even upon the moral qualities, the goodness or
badness, of the individual. It is itself an imponderable something; yet it
carries weight with it. There may be abler men, cleverer men; but it is
the one possessed of will who rises to the surface at these times--the one
who can by some subtle power make other men obey him.

"The will-power goes on universally. In the young aristocrat who gets his
tailor to make another advance in defiance of his conviction that he will
never get his money back. It goes on between lawyer and client; betwixt
doctor and patient; between banker and borrower; betwixt buyer and seller.
It is not tact which enables the person behind the counter to induce
customers to buy what they did not intend to buy, and which bought, gives
them no satisfaction, though it is linked therewith for the effort to be
successful. Whenever two persons meet in business, or in any other
relation in life, up to love-making, there is this will-fight going on,
commonly enough without any consciousness of the struggle. There is a dim
consciousness of the result, but none of the processes. It often takes
years of the intimacy of married life to find out with whom of the pair
the mastery really lies. Often the far stronger character, to all
appearances, has to yield; it is this will-element which underlies the
statement: 'The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong.' In Middle-march' we find in Lydgate a grand aggregation of
qualities, yet shallow, hard, selfish Rosamond masters him thoroughly in
the end. He was not deficient in will-power; possessed more than an
average amount of character; but in the fight he went down at last under
the onslaught of the intense, stubborn will of his narrow-minded spouse.
Their will-contest was the collision of a large warm nature, like a
capable human hand, with a hard, narrow selfish nature, like a steel
button; the hand only bruised itself while the button remained
unaffected."

You must not, however, imagine that every person with whom you engage in
one of these psychic duels is conscious of what is going on. He usually
recognizes that some sort of conflict is under way, but he does not know
the laws and principles of psychic force, and so is in the dark regarding
the procedure. You will find that a little practice of this kind, in which
no great question is involved, will give you a certain knack or trick of
handling your psychic forces, and will, besides, give you that confidence
in yourself that comes only from actual practice and exercise. I can point
out the rules, and give you the principles, but you must learn the little
bits of technique yourself from actual practice.

When you have crossed psychic swords with the other person, gaze at him
intently but not fiercely, and send him this positive strong
thought-vibration: "I am stronger than you, and I shall win!" At the same
time picture to yourself your forces beating down his and overcoming him.
Hold this idea and picture in your mind: "My vibrations are stronger than
are yours--I am beating you!" Follow this up with the idea and picture
of: "You are weakening and giving in--you are being overpowered!" A very
powerful psychic weapon is the following: "My vibrations are scattering
your forces--I am breaking your forces into bits--surrender, surrender
now, I tell you!"

And now for some interesting and very valuable information concerning
psychic defense. You will notice that in the offensive psychic weapons
there is always an assertion of positive statement of your power and its
effect. Well, then, in using the psychic defensive weapon against one of
strong will or psychic force, you reverse the process. That is to say you
deny the force of his psychic powers and forces, and picture them as
melting into nothingness. Get this idea well fixed in your mind, for it is
very important in a conflict of this kind. The effect of this is to
neutralize all of the other person's power so far as its effect on
yourself is concerned--you really do not destroy it in him totally. You
simply render his forces powerless to affect you. This is important not
only when in a psychic conflict of this kind, but also when you wish to
render yourself immune from the psychic forces of other persons. You may
shut yourself up in a strong defensive armor in this way, and others will
be powerless to affect you.

In the positive statement, "I deny!" you have the Occult Shield of
Defense, which is a mighty protection to you. Even if you do not feel
disposed to cultivate and develop your psychic powers in the direction of
influencing others, you should at least develop your defensive powers so
as to resist any psychic attacks upon yourself.

You will find it helpful to practice these offensive and defensive weapons
when you are alone, standing before your mirror and "playing" that your
reflection in the glass is the other person. Send this imaginary other
person the psychic vibrations, accompanied by the mental picture suitable
for it. Act the part out seriously and earnestly, just as if the reflected
image were really another person. This will give you confidence in
yourself, and that indefinable "knack" of handling your psychic weapons
that comes only from practice. You will do well to perfect yourself in
these rehearsals, just as you would in case you were trying to master
anything else. By frequent earnest rehearsals, you will gain not only
familiarity with the process and methods, but you will also gain real
power and strength by the exercise of your psychic faculties which have
heretofore lain dormant. Just as you may develop the muscle of your arm by
calisthenic exercises, until it is able to perform real muscular work of
strength; so you may develop your psychic faculties in this rehearsal
work, so that you will be strongly equipped and armed for an actual
psychic conflict, besides having learned how to handle your psychic
weapons.

After you have practiced sufficiently along the general offensive and
defensive lines, and have learned how to manifest these forces in actual
conflict, you will do well to practice special and specific commands to
others, in the same way. That is to say, practice them first on your
reflected image in the mirror. The following commands (with mental
pictures, of course) will give you good practice. Go about the work in
earnest, and act out the part seriously. Try these exercises: "Here! look
at me!" "Give me your undivided attention!" "Come this way!" "Come to me
at once!" "Go away from me--leave me at once!" "You like me--you like me
very much!" "You are afraid of me!" "You wish to please me!" "You will
agree to my proposition!" "You will do as I tell you!" Any special command
you wish to convey to another person, psychically, you will do well to
practice before the mirror in this way.

When you have made satisfactory progress in the exercises above mentioned,
and are able, to demonstrate them with a fair degree of success in actual
practice, you may proceed to experiment with persons along the lines of
special and direct commands by psychic force. The following will give you
a clear idea of the nature of the experiments in question, but you may
enlarge upon and vary them indefinitely. Remember there is no virtue in
mere words--the effect comes from the power of the thought behind the
words. But, nevertheless, you will find that positive words, used in these
silent commands, will help you to fit in your feeling to the words. Always
make the command a real COMMAND, never a mere entreaty or appeal. Assume
the mental attitude of a master of men--of a commander and ruler of other
men. Here follow a number of interesting experiments along these lines,
which will be very useful to you in acquiring the art of personal
influence of this kind:


SEVEN VALUABLE EXERCISES

EXERCISE 1: When walking down the street behind a person, make him turn
around in answer to your mental command. Select some person who does not
seem to be too much rushed or too busy--select some person who seems to
having nothing particular on his mind. Then desire earnestly that he shall
turn around when you mentally call to him to do so; at the same time
picture him as turning around in answer to your call; and at the same time
concentrate your attention and thought firmly upon him. After a few
moments of preparatory thought, send him the following message, silently
of course, with as much force, positiveness and vigor as possible: "Hey
there! turn around and look at me! Hey! turn around, turn around at once!"
While influencing him fix your gaze at the point on his neck where the
skull joins it--right at the base of the brain, in the back. In a number
of cases, you will find that the person will look around as if someone had
actually called him aloud. In other cases, he will seem puzzled, and will
look from side to side as if seeking some one. After a little practice you
will be surprised how many persons you can affect in this way.

EXERCISE 2: When in a public place, such as a church, concert or theatre,
send a similar message to someone seated a little distance in front of
you. Use the same methods as in the first exercise, and you will obtain
similar results. It will seem queer to you at first to notice how the
other person will begin to fidget and move around in his seat, and finally
glance furtively around as if to see what is causing him the disturbance.
You, of course, will not let him suspect that it is you, but, instead will
gaze calmly ahead of you, and pretend not to notice him.

EXERCISE 3: This is a variation of the first exercise. It is
practiced by sending to a person approaching you on the street, or walking
ahead of you in the same direction, a command to turn to the right, or to
the left, as you prefer. You will be surprised to see how often you will
be successful in this.

EXERCISE 4: This is a variation of the second exercise. It is
practiced by sending to a person seated in front of you in a public place
the command to look to the right, or to the left, as you prefer. Do not
practice on the same person too long, after succeeding at first--it is not
right to torment people, remember.

EXERCISE 5: After having attained proficiency in the foregoing
exercises, you many proceed to command a person to perform certain
unimportant motions, such as rising or sitting down, taking off his hat,
taking out his handkerchief, laying down a fan, umbrella, etc.

EXERCISE 6: The next step is to command persons to say some
particular word having no important meaning; to "put words in his mouth"
while talking to him. Wait until the other person pauses as if in search
of a word, and then suddenly, sharply and forcibly put the word into his
mouth, silently of course. In a very susceptible person, well under your
psychic control, you may succeed in suggesting entire sentences and
phrases to him.

EXERCISE 7: This is the summit of psychic influencing, and, of
course, is the most difficult. But you will be surprised to see how well
you will succeed in many cases, after you have acquired the knack and
habit of sending the psychic message. It consists of commanding the person
to obey the spoken command or request that you are about to make to him.
This is the art and secret of the success of many salesmen, solicitors,
and others working along the lines of influencing other people. It is
acquired by beginning with small things, and gradually proceeding to
greater, and still greater. At this point I should warn you that all the
best occult teachings warn students against using this power for base
ends, improper purposes, etc. Such practices tend to react and rebound
against the person using them, like a boomerang. Beware against using
psychic or occult forces for improper purposes--the psychic laws punish
the offender, just as do the physical laws.

Finally, I caution the student against talking too much about his
developing powers. Beware of boasting or bragging about these things. Keep
silent, and keep your own counsel. When you make known your powers, you
set into operation the adverse and antagonistic thought of persons around
you who may be jealous of you, and who would wish to see you fail, or make
yourself ridiculous. The wise head keepeth a still tongue! One of the
oldest occult maxims is: "Learn! Dare! Do! Keep Silent!!!" You will do
well to adhere strictly to this warning caution.




LESSON XVIII.

PSYCHIC INFLUENCE AT A DISTANCE


The second phase of Psychic Influence is that called Distant Psychic
Influence, in which psychic induction is manifested when the persons are
distant in space from one another--not in the presence of each other.
Here, of course, we see the principle of telepathy involved in connection
with the process of mental induction: and in some cases even the astral
telepathic sense is called into operation.

The student who has followed my explanation and course of reasoning in the
preceding lessons will readily perceive that the principle involved in
this distant phase of psychic influence is precisely the same as that
employed in direct personal psychic influence. As I have explained in an
early lesson, it matters little whether the space to be covered by the
psychic vibratory waves is but one foot or a thousand miles, the principle
is exactly the same. There are, of course, other principles involved in
the case of two persons meeting face to face and calling into force their
psychic powers; for instance, there is the element of suggestion and
association, and other psychological principles which are not in force
when the two persons are out of the actual presence of each other. But so
far as the telepathic or astral psychic powers are concerned, the mere
extension of space does not change the principle.

The student who has developed his power of psychic induction in the
phases mentioned in the preceding chapter, may begin to experiment and
practice psychic induction at long-range, if he so wishes. That is to say,
instead of causing psychic induction in the minds of persons actually in
his presence and sight, he may produce similar results in persons out of
his sight and presence. The person may be brought into presence and
psychic contact, for all practical purposes, by using the visualizing
powers for the purpose of bringing him into the en rapport condition. That
is to say, by using the imagination to bring into the mind a strong clear
picture of the other person, you may induce an en rapport condition in
which he will be practically in the same psychic relation to you as if he
were actually before you. Of course, if he is sufficiently well informed
regarding occult matters, he may shut you out by drawing a psychic circle
around himself which you cannot penetrate, or by surrounding himself with
psychic armor or atmosphere such as I have already mentioned in preceding
lessons. But as he will not likely know anything of this, the average
person may be reached in the manner just mentioned.

Or again, you may establish en rapport conditions by psychometric methods,
by holding to your forehead an article which has been in the other
person's possession for some time; an article worn by him; a piece of his
hair; etc. Or, again, you may use the crystal to bring up his astral
vision before you. Or, again, you may erect an "astral tube" such as I
will mention a little further on in this chapter, and thus establish a
strong en rapport condition.

Having established the en rapport condition with the other person, and
having thus practically brought him into your presence, psychically
speaking, you may proceed to send him commands or demands, just as you did
in the phase of personal psychic influence previously mentioned. You act
precisely as if the other person were present before you, and state your
commands or demands to him just as you would were he seated or standing in
your presence. This is the keynote of the whole thing; the rest is simply
an elaboration and stating of details of methods, etc. With the correct
principle once established, you may apply the same according to your own
wishes and discretion.

This phase of distant psychic influence is at the bottom of all the
wonderful tales, stories and legends of supernatural powers, witchcraft,
sorcery, etc., with which the pages of history are filled. There is of
course always to be found much distortion and exaggeration in these
legends and tales, but they have truth at the bottom of them. In this
connection, let me call your attention to a very important psychic
principle involved. I have told you that by denying the power of any
person over you, you practically neutralize his psychic power--the
stronger and more positive your belief in your immunity, and your denial
of his power over you, the more do you rob him of any such power. The
average person, not knowing this, is more or less passive to psychic
influences of other persons, and may be affected by them to a greater or
less extent, depending upon the psychic development of the person seeking
to influence him. At the extreme of the sensitive pole of psychic
influence, we find those persons who believe firmly that the other person
has power over them, and who are more or less afraid of him. This belief
and fear acts to make them particularly sensitive and impressionable, and
easily affected by his psychic induction. This is the reason that the
so-called witches and sorcerers and others of evil repute have been able
to acquire such a power over their victims, and to cause so much trouble.
The secret is that the victims believed in the power of the other person,
and feared their power. The greater the belief in, and fear of, the power
of the person, the greater the susceptibility to his influence; the
greater the sense of power of neutralizing the power, and the disbelief in
his power to affect them, the greater the degree of immunity: this is the
rule!

Accordingly we find that persons in various stages of the history of the
world have been affected by the influences of witches, sorcerers, and
other unprincipled persons. In most cases these so-called witches and
sorcerers themselves were under the delusion that they were assisted by
the devil or some other supernatural being. They did not realize that they
were simply using perfectly natural methods, and employing perfectly
natural forces. For that matter, you must remember that magnetism and
electricity, in ancient days, were considered as supernatural forces in
some way connected with demonic powers.

Studying the history of witchcraft, sorcery, black-magic, and the like,
you will find that the devotees thereof usually employed some psychometric
method. In other cases they would mould little figures of clay, or of wax,
in the general shape and appearance of the person whom they wished to
affect. It was thought that these little figures were endowed with some
supernatural powers or attributes, but of course this was mere
superstition. The whole power of these little figures arose from the fact
that they aided the imagination of the spell-worker in forming a mental
image of the person sought to be influenced; and thus established a strong
en rapport condition. Added to this, you must remember that the fear and
belief of the public greatly aided the spell-worker and increased his
power and influence over these poor persons.

I will give you a typical case, taken from an old German book, which
thoroughly illustrates the principles involved in cases of this kind.
Understand this case, and you will have the secret and working principle
of them all. The story is told by an eminent German physician of the last
century. He relates that he was consulted by one of his patients, a
wealthy farmer living near by. The farmer complained that he was disturbed
every night by strange noises which sounded like someone pounding iron.
The disturbances occurred between the hours of ten o'clock and midnight,
each and every night. The physician asked him if he suspected anyone of
causing the strange trouble. The farmer answered that he suspected an old
enemy of his, an old village blacksmith living several miles away from his
farm. It appears that an old long-standing feud between them had broken
out afresh, and that the blacksmith had made threats of employing his
"hex" (witchcraft) powers on the old farmer. The blacksmith was reputed to
be a sort of "hex" or male-witch, and the farmer believed in his diabolic
powers and was very much in fear of them. So you see the ideal condition
for psychic receptivity was present.

The physician called on the blacksmith, and taking him by surprise, gazing
sternly into his eyes and asked him: "What do you do every night between
ten and twelve o'clock?" The blacksmith, frightened and disturbed,
stammered out: "I hammer a bar of iron every night at that time, and all
the while I think intently of a bad neighbor of mine who once cheated me
out of some money; and I 'will' at the same time that the noise will
disturb his rest, until he will pay me back my money to get peace and
quiet." The physician bade him to desist from his evil practices, under
threats of dire punishment; and then went to the farmer and made him
straighten out the financial dispute between the two. Thereafter, there
was no more trouble.

So you see in this case all the necessary elements were present. First
there was the belief of the blacksmith in his own powers--this gave him
self-confidence and psychic power. Then there was the belief and fear on
the part of the farmer--this made him an easy subject, and very
susceptible to psychic induction, etc. Then there was the action of the
blacksmith beating the iron--this gave force and clearness to his
visualization of the idea he wished to induce in the mind of the other.
And, finally, there was his will employed in every stroke, going out in
the direction of the concentrated wish and purpose of influencing the
farmer. You see, then, that every psychic element was present. It was no
wonder that the old farmer was disturbed.

Among the negroes of the South, in America; and among the Hawaiians; we
find marked instances of this kind. The negro Voodoo men and women work
black magic on those of their race who are superstitious and credulous,
and who have a mortal fear of the Voodoo. You see the conditions obtained
are much the same as in the case of the German case just cited. Travellers
who have visited the countries in which there is a large negro population,
have many interesting tales to recite of the terrible workings of these
Voodoo black magicians. In some cases, sickness and even death is the
result. But, mark you this! it is only those who believe in, and fear, the
power of the Voodoos that are affected. In Hawaii, the Kahunas or native
magicians are renowned for their power to cause sickness and death to
those who have offended them; or to those who have offended some client of
the Kahuna, and who have hired the latter to "pray" the enemy to sickness
or death. The poor ignorant Hawaiians, believing implicitly in the power
of the Kahunas, and being in deadly fear of them, are very susceptible to
their psychic influence, and naturally fall easy victims, unless they buy
of the Kahuna, or make peace with his client. White persons living in
Hawaii are not affected by the Kahunas, for they do not believe in them,
neither do they fear them. Unconsciously, but still strongly, they deny
the power, and are immune. So, you see, the principle working out here,
also. Once you have the master-key, you may unlock many doors of mystery
which have heretofore been closed to you.

We do not have to fall back on cases of witchcraft, however, in order to
illustrate this phase of the use of psychic influence for selfish ends. In
Europe and America there are teachers of a low form of occultism who
instruct their pupils in the art of producing induced mental states in the
minds of others, for purposes of financial gain or other selfish ends. For
instance, there is a Western teacher who instructs his pupils to induce
desired mental states in prospective customers, or others whom they may
wish to influence for selfish reasons. This teacher tells his pupils to:
"Imagine your prospective customer, or other person, as seated in a chair
before which you are standing. Make the imagined picture as strong as
possible, for upon this depends your success. Then proceed to 'treat' this
person just as if he were actually present. Concentrate your will upon
him, and tell him what you expect to tell him when you meet him. Use all
of the arguments that you can think of, and at the same time hold the
thought that he must do as you say. Try to imagine him as complying with
your wishes in every respect, for this imagining will tend to 'come true'
when you really meet the person. This rule may be used, not only in the
case of prospective customers, but also in the case of persons whom you
wish to influence in any way whatsoever." Surely this is a case of
employing psychic powers for selfish purposes, if anything is.

Again, in Europe and America, particularly in the latter country, we find
many persons who have picked up a smattering of occult knowledge by means
of some of the many healing cults and organizations which teach the power
of thought over physical diseases. In the instruction along the lines of
distant mental healing, the student is taught to visualize the patient as
strongly and clearly as possible, and to then proceed to make statements
of health and strength. The mind of the patient, and that of the healer,
cooperate and in many cases work wonderful cures. As you will see in the
last lesson of this course, there is great power in the mind to induce
healthful vibrations in the mind of others, and the work is a good and
worthy one. But, alas! as is so often the case, the good teaching is
sometimes perverted, and applied for unworthy and selfish ends. Some of
the persons who have picked up the principles of mental healing have
discovered that the same power may be used in a bad as well as in a good
direction. They accordingly, proceed to "treat" other persons with the
object of persuading them to do things calculated to benefit the person
using the psychic power. They seek to get these other persons under their
psychic influence, and to then take advantage of them in some way or
other.

I hope that it is practically unnecessary for me to warn my students
against evil practices of this kind--I trust that I have not drawn any
students of this class to me. In case, however, that some of you may have
been, or may be in the future, tempted to use your psychic powers
improperly, in this way, I wish to caution and warn you positively against
so doing. Outside of the ordinary morality which should prevent you from
taking advantage of another person in this way, I wish to say to you that
anyone so misusing psychic or astral powers will inevitably bring down
upon his head, sooner or later, certain occult astral forces which will
prove disastrous to him. He will become involved in the web of his own
making, and will suffer greatly. Never by any means allow yourself to be
tempted into indulging in any of the practices of Black Magic, under any
form of disguise. You will live to regret it if you do. Employ your
powers, when you develop them, for the good of others; or at least, for
purely scientific investigation and knowledge.

The scientific investigator of this phase of psychic influence, will wish
to become acquainted with what the occultists call "the astral tube." In
this phase of the phenomena, you manifest upon the astral plane, rather
than upon the physical. The astral form of telepathy is manifested, rather
than the ordinary form. While there are a number of technical points
involved in the production of the astral tube, I shall endeavor to
instruct you regarding its creation and use in as plain words as possible,
omitting all reference to technical occult details which would only serve
to distract your attention and confuse your mind. The advanced occult
student will understand these omitted technicalities without being told of
them; the others would not know what was meant by them, if mentioned, in
the absence of a long stage of preparatory teaching. After all, the theory
is not of so much importance to most of you as are the practical working
principles. I ask your careful attention to what I have to say in this
subject of the astral tube.

The Astral Tube is formed by the person forming in his imagination (i.e.,
on the astral plane by means of his imagination or visualizing powers), a
tube or small tunnel between himself and the person whom he wishes to
influence. He starts by picturing it in his mind a whirling vortex,
similar to the whirling ring of smoke emitted from a "coughing" engine,
and sometimes by a man smoking a cigar, about six inches to one foot in
diameter. He must will the imagined vortex-ring to move forward as if it
were actually boring a tunnel through the atmosphere. When the knack of
producing this astral tube is acquired, it will be found that the
visualized tunnel seems to vibrate with a peculiar intensity, and will
seem to be composed of a substance far more subtle than air. Then, at the
other end of this astral tube you must picture the other person, the one
whom you wish to influence. The person will seem as if viewed through the
wrong end of an opera-glass. When this condition is gained, there will be
found to be a high degree of en rapport between yourself and the other
person. The secret consists in the fact that you have really established a
form of clairvoyance between yourself and the person. When you have
induced this condition, proceed with your mental commands and pictures
just as if you were in the presence of the person himself. That is the
whole thing in a nutshell.

In order that you may have another viewpoint from which to consider the
astral tube, or what corresponds to it, I wish to give you here a little
quotation from another writer on the subject, who presents the matter from
a somewhat more technical standpoint. Read this quotation in connection
with my own description of the astral tube, and you will form a pretty
complete and clear idea of the phenomenon. The writer mentioned says: "It
is impossible here to give an exhaustive disquisition on astral physics;
all I need say is that it is possible to make in the astral substance a
definite connecting-line that shall act as a telegraph wire to convey
vibrations by means of which all that is going on at the other end of it
may be seen. Such a line is established, be it understood, not by a direct
projection through space of astral matter, but by such action upon a line
(or rather many lines) of particles of that substance as will render them
capable of forming a conductor for vibrations of the character required.
This preliminary action can be set up in two ways--either by the
transmission of energy from particle to particle, until the line is
formed, or by the use of a force from a higher plane which is capable of
acting upon the whole line simultaneously. Of course this latter method
implies far greater development, since it involves the knowledge of (and
the power to use) forces of a considerably higher level.

"Even the simpler and purely astral operation is a difficult one to
describe, though quite an easy one to perform. It may be said to partake
somewhat of the nature of the magnetization of a bar of steel; for it
consists in what we might call the polarization, by an effort of the human
will, of a number of astral atoms reaching from the operator to the scene
which he wishes to observe. All the atoms thus affected are held for the
time being with their axes rigidly parallel to one another, so that they
form a kind of temporary tube along which the clairvoyant may look. This
method has the disadvantage that the telegraph line is liable to
disarrangement or even destruction by any sufficiently strong astral
current which happens to cross its path; but if the original creative
effort were fairly definite, this would be a contingency of only
infrequent occurrence. The view of a distant scene obtained by means of
this 'astral current' is in many ways not unlike that seen through a
telescope. Human figures usually appear very small, like those on a
distant stage, but in spite of their diminutive size they are as clear as
though they were close by. Sometimes it is possible by this means to hear
what is said as well as to see what is done; but as in the majority of
cases this does not happen, we must consider it rather as the
manifestation of an additional power than as a necessary corollary of the
faculty of sight."

I would feel that I had not done my whole duty to the student, or reader
of this book, were I to conclude this chapter without pointing out a means
of protection against the use of this phase of psychic influence against
them on the part of some unscrupulous person; or for that matter, against
the meddling influence of any person whatsoever, for any purpose
whatsoever, without one's permission and consent. Therefore, I wish now to
point out the general principles of self-protection or defense against
this class of psychic influence.

In the first place, you must, of course, refuse to admit to your mind any
feeling of fear regarding the influence of other persons--for that is the
open door to their influence, as I have pointed out to you. If you have
been, or are fearful of any persons psychic influence, you must get to
work and drive out that feeling by positive and vigorous denials. The
denial, you remember, is the positive neutralizer of the psychic influence
of another person, providing you make it in full belief of its truth. You
must take the position (which is a true one) that you are immune to the
psychic attack or influence. You should say, mentally, "I deny to any
person the power to influence me psychically without my consent; I am
positive to all such influences, and they are negative to me; I neutralize
them by this denial!"

If you feel sudden impulses to act in some way which you have not thought
of doing, or toward which you have had an aversion, pause a moment and
say, mentally, "If this is an outside influence, I deny its power over me;
I deny it, and send it back to its sender, to his defeat and confusion."
You will then experience a feeling of relief and freedom. In such cases
you may frequently be approached later on by the person who would have
been most benefitted by your action; he will appear surprised when you
"turn him down," and will act in a confused way. He may not have
consciously tried to influence you, but may have merely been wishing
strongly that you would do as he desired.

It should encourage you to know that it requires much less force to repel
and neutralize psychic influence of this kind, than is required to send
forth the power; an ounce of denial and protection overcomes a pound of
psychic attacking power. Nature gives you the means of protection, and
gives you "the best end of the stick," and it is your own fault if you do
not effectively use it. A word to the wise is sufficient.




LESSON XIX.

LAWS OF PSYCHIC ATTRACTION


The third phase of Psychic Influence is that which may be called Indirect
Psychic Influence, in which psychic induction is manifested in the minds
of other persons coming in contact with the thought vibrations of the
person manifesting them, although no deliberate attempt is made to
influence the mind of any particular person or persons. Closely connected
with and involved in this phase of psychic influence, is that which is
called the Psychic Law of Attraction. So closely are these two connected
that I shall consider them together in this lesson.

The fundamental principle of this phase of psychic influence is the
well-known psychic fact that mental and emotional states not only induce
similar vibrations in those who are similar attuned on the psychic
vibratory scale, but also tend to attract and draw to the person other
persons who are vibrating along similar lines, and also tend to repel
those who are vibrating in an opposing note or scale of psychic vibration.

In the preceding lessons I have shown you how by induction we tend to
arouse in others mental and emotional states similar to our own. But there
is a law in effect here, which must be noted if you wish to thoroughly
understand this phase of psychic influences. Omitting all technical
explanations, and getting right down to the heart of the phenomenon, I
would say that the general principle is this: Psychic induction is
difficult in proportion to the opposing quality of the characteristic
mental and emotional states of the person affected; and easy in proportion
to the harmonious quality thereof. That is to say, in plain words, that if
a person's habitual thought and emotions are along the same lines that you
are trying to induce in him, you will find it easy to induce the same in
him; if, on the contrary, they are of an opposing nature, then you will
find it difficult to so influence him. The many degrees of agreement and
difference in the psychic vibrations of persons constitute a scale of
comparative response to any particular form of mental or emotional
vibrations.

It is hard to change the spots of a leopard, or the skin of an Ethiopian,
as we are told on ancient authority. It is almost as difficult to change
the characteristic mental and emotional states of a person by psychic
induction, except after long and repeated efforts. On the contrary, let a
person have certain characteristic mental and emotional habits, then these
may be aroused in them with the greatest ease by means of psychic
induction. For instance, if a person is characteristically and habitually
peaceful, mild and calm, it will be very difficult to arouse in him by
psychic induction the vibrations of anger, fight and excitement. On the
other hand, if the other person is combative, fierce and easily excited to
wrath, it is the easiest possible thing to arouse these feelings in him by
psychic induction. So much for ordinary psychic induction; let us now
consider indirect psychic induction, in which the same principle operates.

In indirect psychic induction, that is to say in cases in which psychic
vibrations are aroused by induction without deliberate attempt or design
to influence any particular person or persons, there is noted the
manifestation of a peculiar law of attraction and repulsion along psychic
lines. This psychic law operates in the direction of attracting to oneself
other persons who, actively or passively, vibrate on the same note, or on
some note or notes in general harmony therewith. In the same, way, the law
causes you to repel other persons who vibrate on a note or notes in
general inharmony or discord to yourself. So, in short, we go through life
attracting or repelling, psychically, others in harmonious or inharmonious
psychic relation to us, respectively. An understanding of this law and its
workings will throw light upon many things in your life which you have not
understood previously.

You of course understand that you are constantly radiating currents of
psychic vibrations, some of which flow out to great distances from you,
and affect others often far removed from you in space. But you may not
also know that on the astral plane there is manifesting a similar sequence
of cause and effect. A strong emotional vibration, or a strong desire or
will, tends to manifest on the astral plane by attracting or repelling
others in psychic harmony or inharmony with you. This phenomenon is not so
common as is that of ordinary thought vibrations from brain to brain, but
it is far more common that is generally supposed. It is particularly
marked in cases of men of strong desire and will, and strong creative
imagination. These vibrations awakening response in the minds of those in
harmony with them, tend to draw to one those other persons whose general
character will fit in with the desires and ideas of the first person, or
to repel those who are not harmonious therewith. This explains the
peculiar phenomenon of strong men in business, politics and other walks of
life, drawing and attracting to them other men who will fit in with their
general plans and aims.

This law works two ways. Not only do you draw such persons to you as will
fit in with your plans and purposes, but you are attracted to them by the
same law. Not only this, but you will find that through the peculiar
workings of this law even things and circumstances, as well as persons,
will seem to be moulded by your strong desires and ideas, providing your
psychic vibrations are sufficiently strong and clear. Have you never
noticed how a strong, resourceful magnetic man will seem to actually draw
to him the persons, things and circumstances that he needs to carry out
and manifest his plans and designs. To many, not understanding this great
law, these things have seemed positively uncanny and mysterious. But,
now-a-days, the big men of business and politics are beginning to
understand these psychic laws, and to apply them deliberately and with
purpose.

Some of the great leaders in the business world, and in politics, are
known to deliberately start into operation strong psychic vibrations, and
to send out strong psychic currents of attraction, by the methods that I
have already explained to you. They, of course, are filled with a more
than ordinary degree of desire and will and, in the second place, they
create very strong and clear mental pictures of their plans working out
successfully to a finish; then concentrate strongly on the thing; and lo!
the effect is felt by all hands and on all sides. They "treat the public"
(to use the term favored by some of the metaphysical cults of the day) by
holding the mental picture of that which they strongly desire to come to
pass, and by concentrating their thought and will strongly upon it.

A favorite mental picture of some of these men (who have been instructed
by teachers of occultism), is that of themselves as the centre of a great
psychic whirlpool, drawing to themselves the persons, things and
circumstances calculated to bring success and realization to them. Others
picture their thought-vibrations flowing from them like the rings in a
pond into which a stone had been dropped, influencing a constantly
widening circle of other persons; then they picture the persons being
drawn to them in the manner just mentioned. They persist in this practice
day after day, week after week, month after month, year after year--is it
any wonder that they draw to themselves that which they desire?

Other persons of lesser caliber take similar advantage of the law in the
same way, but on a smaller scale. In every community there are certain
persons who seem to draw to themselves the patronage and custom of the
community, in some peculiar way. In most cases this may be traced back to
some form of psychic influence. I do not mean that these persons
consciously and deliberately set these forces into operation. On the
contrary, many of them do so more or less unconsciously, and without a
knowledge of the underlying psychic principles involved. Such persons have
stumbled on a portion of the psychic laws, and have used them more or less
unconsciously and without understanding the real reason of the happening.
They found out that certain mental states and certain mental pictures
tended to produce certain results--that they "worked out"--and so they
continued them. Some of these men think of the whole thing as something
supernatural, and get to believe that they are being helped by some
supernatural power; whereas, they are simply operating under a universal
psychic law of cause and effect.

In America a number of teachers and writers have devoted much attention to
this phase of the general subject of psychic influence. Cults have been
formed upon this general basis, the main idea of their followers being
that of attracting financial and other success by means of this phase of
psychic force. One of the leading writers along this line, says: "An
individual who has cultivated the faculty of concentration, and has
acquired the art of creating sharp, clear, strong, mental images, and who
when engaged in an undertaking will so charge his mind with the idea of
success, will be bound to become an attracting centre. And if such an
individual will keep his mental picture ever in his mind, even though it
be in the background of his mind, when he is attending to the details and
planning of his affairs--if he will give his mental picture a prominent
place in his mental gallery, taking a frequent glance at it, and using his
will upon it to create new scenes of actual success, he will create for
himself a centre of radiating thought that will surely be felt by those
coming within its field of influence.

"Such a man frequently 'sees people as coming to him and his enterprises,
and as falling in line with his plans. He mentally 'sees' money flowing in
to him, and all of his plans working out right. In short, he mentally
imagines each step of his plans a little ahead of the time for their
execution, and he concentrates forcibly and earnestly upon them. It is
astonishing to witness how events, people, circumstances, and things seem
to move in place in actual life as if urged by some mighty power to serve
to materialize the conditions so imaged in the mind of the man. But,
understand, there must be active mental effort behind the imaging. Day
dreamers do not materialize thought--they merely dissipate energy. The man
who converts thought in activity and material being throws energy into
the task, and puts forth his willpower through the pictured image. Without
the rays of the will there will be no picture projected, no matter how
beautifully the imagination has projected it. Thought pictured in mental
images, and then vitalized by the force of the desire, and will, tend to
objectify themselves into material being."

The student will be interested in reading and hearing the various theories
and explanations given by different writers and teachers to account for
the phenomena of psychic influence. Once he has grasped the real
scientific principles involved, he will be able to see the same in
operation in all of the cases cited by the different teachers and writers,
and will find that this fundamental principle fully explains and accounts
for all of these cases, no matter how puzzling they may seem, or how
mysterious they may be claimed to be by those mentioning them. Truth is
very simple when we brush away the fantastic dressings which have been
placed around it by those who have lacked knowledge of the true
fundamental principles.

We see this same law or principle operating in very many different ways
from those previously mentioned. For instance, we frequently find cases in
which one person has a strong desire for a certain kind of assistance in
his business or other work. He has almost given up hope of finding the
right kind of person, for those whom he has tried have failed to measure
up the requirements of the situation. If he will (and he sometimes does)
follow the general plan just mentioned, he will set into operation the
psychic forces which will attract that person to him, and him to that
person. In some peculiar way, the two will be thrown together, and the
combination will work out to the best advantage of both. In these cases,
each person is seeking the other, and the psychic forces of attraction,
once set into operation, serve to bring them together.

In like manner, one often draws to himself certain knowledge and
information that he requires or is desirous of gaining. But, and you must
always remember this, no miracle is worked, for it is simply a matter of
the working out of natural laws of cause and effect--attraction and
response to attraction--on the psychic or astral plane. Such a person will
accidently (!) run across some other person who will be led to give him
the key to the knowledge he seeks. Perhaps a book may be mentioned, or
some reference to some writer be made. If the hint is followed up, the
desired information comes to light. Many persons have had the psychic
experience of being led to some book store and induced to examine a
particular shelf of books, whereupon a particular book presents itself
which changes the whole course of the person's life. Or, perhaps, one will
pick up a newspaper apparently at random, and without purpose; and therein
will find some information, or at least a hint in the direction where the
information may be found. When one accustoms himself to the workings of
psychic forces, these things soon become accepted as a matter of course,
and cease to arouse wonder or surprise. The workings of the Psychic Law of
Attraction is seen to be as natural and invariable as the law of
gravitation, or magnetic attraction, once one has mastered its principles,
and learned the methods of its application. Surely such a wonderful law is
well worth study, attention, investigation, and mastery, isn't it?

A writer along the lines of Mental Science, which is really based on the
principles which have been stated in this book, has the following to say
regarding his system: "Wonderful results arise by reason of what has been
called 'The Law of Attraction,' by the workings of which each person is
continually drawing to himself the people, things, objects, and even
circumstances in harmony and accord with his prevailing mental states.
Like attracts like, and the mental states determine that which one draws
to himself. If you are not satisfied with what is coming to you, start to
work and change your mental attitudes and mental states, and you will see
a change gradually setting in, and then the things that you want will
begin to come your way. * * * A most important fact about the effect of
mental vibrations upon people lies in the principle that one is more
affected by vibrations in harmony with his own accustomed feelings and
mental states, than by those of an opposite nature. A man who is full of
evil schemes, and selfish aims, is more apt to be caught up by similar
vibrations than one who lives above that plane of thought. He is more
easily tempted by evil suggestions and influences, than one to whom these
things are abhorrent. And the same is true on every plane. A man whose
mental attitude is one of confidence and fearlessness, is not apt to be
affected by vibrations of a negative, pessimistic, gloomy nature, and vice
versa. Therefore, if you wish to receive the vibrations of the thoughts
and feelings of others, you must place yourself in a mental attitude
corresponding with those vibrations which you wish to receive. And if you
wish to avoid vibrations of a certain kind, the best way is to rise above
them in your own mind, and to cultivate the mental states opposite them.
The positive always overcomes the negative--and optimistic mental states
are always positive to pessimistic mental states."

Another writer on, and practitioner of Mental Science, in America, several
years ago, explained her theory and practice by means of the term
"corelation of thoughts and things." She held that when one thought
positively, clearly and forcibly of a thing, he "related" himself to that
thing, and tended to attract it to him, and to be attracted toward it. She
held that true wisdom consists in so managing our thoughts that we shall
relate ourselves only to those things which we know to be desirable and
beneficial to ourselves, and to avoid thinking of those which are harmful
and detrimental to us. The student of this book will see how this
practical Mental Scientist was really using the same principles that we
have examined and become acquainted within this book, although she called
them by another name, and explained them by another theory. At the bottom
of all the teachings and theories you will always find the one same basic
principle and universal law.

The advanced student of occultism knows that each and every one of us is
really a creator of his own circumstances, environment and conditions, to
a great extent. Each of us is able to so modify our mental activities as
to bring about such changes in our environment and surroundings as to
actually re-create them. The things accomplished by successful men are
really but materializations of that which they have previously held in
their mental vision. Everything is first created on the psychic plane, and
then manifested in the physical world. All the great works of man, the
great bridges, great buildings, tunnels, machinery, cities, railroads,
canals, works of art, musical compositions, etc., first existed in the
mind of their creators, and were then afterward materialized in physical
form and shape. And, so you see we are proceeding with our work of mental
creations whenever we think and make mental images. This, however, is no
new teaching. It is as old as the race of mankind. Over twenty-five
hundred years ago, Buddha said to his disciples: "All that we are is the
result of what we have thought; it is founded on our thoughts; it is made
up of our thoughts."

I would be telling you but half the story did I not warn you that strong
Fear may play the part ordinarily filled by Desire in the production of
the psychic phenomena of materialization of mental pictures. Strange as
it may appear at first, a strong fear that a thing will come to pass will
act much the same as a strong desire that the happening will occur.
Consequently, many persons by continually dwelling upon the thing that
they fear may happen to them, actually attract that thing to them, just as
if they had actually desired and wished for it. I cannot go into occult
technicalities in explaining this strange fact; but the gist of the secret
may be said to consist in the fact that the person clearly and vividly
pictures in his mind the thing that he fears may happen to him. He thus
creates a strong mental-picture or image of it, which sets into forces the
attractive power of psychic influence and draws the feared thing into
material reality. As Job said: "The thing that I feared hath come upon
me." The moral of this is, of course, that persons should learn to stamp
out fear and mental images of things feared. Instead, they should make
strong positive mental denials of the things that they may find themselves
fearing. They should deny the reality of the feared thing, and assert
positively their own superiority to the thing, and their power to overcome
it.

A great religious cult has sprung into existence which makes a leading
doctrine of this ability to materialize the things which one desires, and
to deny out of existence undesirable things. Many persons who have
witnessed the wonderful success of some of the followers of this cult or
organization, have been puzzled to account for the same on scientific and
rational grounds. A little understanding of fundamental occult and
psychic principles, as given in these lessons, will show the "why and
wherefore" of these strange and wonderful manifestations. In this
connection you must remember that the combined thought of the thousands of
persons composing this cult or organization undoubtedly gives additional
psychic force to the mental affirmations and denials of the individual
member thereof.

In past and present, and probably in future time, there have been many
instances of magical procedures tending to bring about the results that we
have herein seen to come about by reason of psychic influence, in some of
its many phases. These magic procedures have usually been accompanied by
incantations, ceremonies, strange rites, evocations, etc., which were
supposed to have great virtue in bringing about desired results. But the
true occultists now know that these ceremonies and rites were merely hopes
to the imagination and aids to faith, and thus tended to bring about the
psychic phenomena. There was no virtue in these ceremonies themselves, and
the same results may be secured by simply following the procedure outlined
in this book. The wonders of ancient magic have been reproduced by the
modern occultists, without all the mumbo-jumbo of the past rites and
ceremonies.

A gifted English writer upon the subject of the relation of mysticism and
magic, sums up the gist of the principles of Magic as follows:

"The central doctrine of Magic may now be summed up thus:

"(1) That a supersensible and real cosmic medium exists, which
interpenetrates, influences, and supports the tangible and apparent world,
and is amenable to the categories both of meta-physics and of physics."
[This of course is the astral plane, which is the container of the subtle
form or framework of all that exists on the physical plane.]

"(2) That there is an established analogy and equilibrium between the real
(and unseen) world, and the illusory manifestation that we call the world
of sense." [By this of course is meant the correspondence and balance
between the subtle form of things and the material manifestation thereof.
Things created in the astral, tend to materialize on the physical plane.
All creation proceeds from the astral to the physical.]

"(3) That this analogy may be discerned, and this equilibrium controlled,
by the disciplined will of man, which thus becomes master of itself and of
fate." [The essence of Will consists of strong desire accompanied by a
clear mental picture of the thing desired, and held steady and firm by
concentration.]

So you see by reference to the above very clear statement of the central
doctrine of Magic, and my explanations thereof, that in these lessons you
have been taught the very essence of the wonderful, mysterious ancient
Magic, and its modern counterpart. As for the various rites and
ceremonies, as I have said, these are mere symbols and aids to mental
imaging and concentration. As an eminent occultist once said, "Ceremonies
being but artificial methods of creating certain habits of the will, they
cease to be necessary when these habits have become fixed." The master of
occultism sees ceremonies, rites, and ritual as but the playthings of the
kindergarten scholar--useful and important so far as they go, but serving
merely to teach the scholar, sooner or later, that he may proceed without
them.

In this chapter I have condensed enough information to fill a whole book.
I trust that you will study it carefully, and not miss its main points.




LESSON XX.

PSYCHIC AND MAGNETIC HEALING


Probably no phase of psychic influence is more familiar to the average
person of the Western world than is that of the healing of physical ills
and conditions by means of psychic influence under one name or another.
Great healing cults and organizations have been built up upon this basis,
and the interest in the subject has taken on the form of a great popular
movement.

As is natural in cases of this kind, there have been hundreds of theories
advanced to account for the phenomena of psychic healing, and a still
greater number of methods of treatments devised to carry out the
principles of the theories. Ranging from the teaching of actual divine
interposition and influence arising from certain forms of belief and
practice, covering many intermediate stages, the theories even include a
semi-materialistic hypothesis in which mind is considered as an attribute
of matter, but having a magic influence over the forms of matter when
properly applied. But it is worthy of note that no matter what the general
or particular theory, or what the favored method of application, these
healing schools or cults, as well as the independent practitioners, meet
with a very fair degree of success and perform quite a number of cures.

Many of these Western advocates and practitioners of psychic healing
practically hold that the whole system is of very recent discovery, and
that it has nothing whatsoever to do with ordinary occult science. The
occultists however are able to smile at these ideas and beliefs, for they
not only recognize the general principles involved, but they also are
aware that these principles, and their application, have been known to
advanced occultists for thousands of years. I do not say this in any
dispargement of the moderns schools of psychic healing, for I am in full
sympathy with their great work; I merely mention the matter that the
student may get the right historical perspective in considering this phase
of psychic phenomena and influence.

So far as the methods of application are concerned, the true occultist
recognizes that most of the methods and forms of treatment are but outward
cloaks or disguises for the real psychic healing principle. The gist of
the real methods is to be found in the principles of the application of
psychic influence which I have presented to you in these lessons, viz: (1)
Strong desire to make the cure; (2) clear mental image or picture of the
desired condition as actually present in the patient at this time; and (3)
concentration of the attention and mind of the healer, so as to bring to a
focus to two preceding mental states. Here you have the real secret of
psychic healing methods--the rest are all elaborations thereof, dressed up
forms and ceremonies which affect the imagination, faith, belief and
confidence of the patient, and thus make the healing process much easier.
In fact, with the proper degree of faith and confidence on the part of the
patient, there is but little need of a healer, for the patient may treat
and cure himself. However, in most cases, the presence of the healer aids
materially in arousing the fate and confidence of the patient, and hastens
the cure.

Again, so far as the theories underlying the cures are concerned,
occultists are able to reduce them all to a single working theory or
principle, which includes all the rest. Brushing aside all technical
details, and all attempts to trace back the healing process to the
ultimate facts of the universe, I may say that the gist of the principle
of all psychic healing is that of influencing the astral foundation of the
various organs and parts, cells and centres, so as to make it proceed to
manifest a more perfect physical counterpart. All psychic healing is
really accomplished on the astral body first--then the physical body
responds to the renewed activities of its astral counterpart. To get the
real significance of this statement it is necessary for you to realize
just what the astral body really is. This once grasped, the difficulties
vanish, and you are able to form a clear conception of the entire matter
and process.

The astral body is a precise counterpart of the physical body, its organs,
its parts, its centres, and its cells. In fact, the astral body is the
pattern upon which the physical body is materialized. The astral body is
composed of an etheric substance of a very high rate of vibration. In one
sense it may be considered as a very subtle form of matter--in another as
a semi-materialized form of force or energy. It is finer and more subtle
that the rarest vapors or gases known to science. And, yet, it has a
strong degree of tenacity and cohesiveness that enables it to resist
attacks from the material side of nature. As I have said, each organ,
part, centre or cell, of the physical body has its astral pattern or
basis. In fact, the physical body has been built up, in whole and in all
of its parts, on the pattern and base of the astral body. Moreover, in
case of impaired functioning of the physical organs or parts, and impaired
activity of the physical body, its limbs, etc., if we can manage to arouse
the activities of the astral body we may cause it to re-materialize or
re-energize the physical body, and thus restore health and activity to it.
If the liver, for instance, is not functioning properly, we proceed to
start up the activities of the astral counterpart of that organ, to the
end that the physical organ may be re-energized, and recreated in a
measure. All true psychic healing work is performed on the astral plane,
before it manifests on the physical.

At this point, I should also call your attention to the effect of "prana,"
or life energy, in some cases of healing. This prana is what Western
healers mean when they speak of "human magnetism" in their healing work.
So far from being an imaginary force, as claimed by the physical
scientists and materialists, it is known to all occultists as an active
principle of the human body, and as of great efficacy in the psychic
treatment of disease. I shall mention the details of this form of
treatment as we proceed--I mention it at this place merely to call your
attention to the fact of its existence.

Before passing on to the consideration of other phases of the subject
before us, I would like to call your attention to the fact that from the
earliest days of history there have been recorded instances of some form
of psychic healing. In the earlier days the psychic healing work was left
entirely in the hands of the priesthood of the various religions
prevailing in the several counties of the world. Claiming to have an
exclusive divine sanction to perform healing work, these priests used
various ceremonies, rites, incantations, etc., in order to obtain their
results. In many cases these priests were ignorant of the real psychic
forces invoked and set into operation; they merely practiced methods which
had been found to work out effectively, and which had been handed down to
them by their predecessors. In other cases, however, the priests
undoubtedly were skilled occultists, and had a very full knowledge of the
forces they were using; though, as the masses of the people were very
ignorant it was impossible to acquaint them with these things so far above
their understanding; and, consequently, the priests applied the healing
forces under the disguise of their religious ceremonies and rites.

From time to time, however, as civilization progressed, there came into
prominence persons who worked cures of physical ills by means of magical
ceremonies and other similar methods, but who were outside of the
priesthood. Some of these men undoubtedly had a very fair knowledge of the
real secret of their cures, though they disguised them to suit the mental
condition of their patients, and, also, probably for purposes of self
glorification. In other cases, however, it is probable that these healers
had merely stumbled across the fact that certain things said in a certain
way tended to work cures; or that certain physical objects seemed to have
therapeutic virtue. They did not realize that the whole healing virtue of
their systems depended upon the strong idea in their own minds, coupled
with the strong faith and confidence in the mind of the patient. And so
the work went on.

In some of the oldest records of the human race, the scriptures of the
various peoples, we find that "laying on of hands" was the favorite method
employed by the holy men and priests, and other performing healing work.
From the first there seems to have been an almost instinctive recognition
on the part of man of the fact that there is a healing power in the touch
of the hand. Even ignorant and savage mothers instinctively apply their
hands to the hurt bodies of their children--a custom that has its
counterpart in civilized races, by the way. The child is taught to expect
physical relief from the application of the mother's hands, and its mind
at once pictures relief. Not only is the mental picture created, but the
desire and confidence is established in the minds of both persons. The
same thing is true of all "laying on of hands," and thus are the
principles of all psychic influence brought into play. But this is not all
there is to it. In the first place, there is an actual transference of
prana from the body of the healer to that of the patient, which serves to
energize and revitalize the cells and centres of the body of the latter.
In the second place, there is the effect upon the astral body of the
patient, which tends to materialize better physical conditions. In the
third place, there is that combination and union of the minds of the two
persons, which gives extra force and power to psychic influence. Is it any
wonder that cures take place under these circumstances?

In the modern revival of the almost lost art and science of psychic
healing among the general public, there has been unusual stress laid upon
the feature of "absent healing," in which the patient and the healer are
not in each other's presence. To many this has seemed actually miraculous,
and as a positive proof of divine interposition. But a little thought will
show the student that such cures are not unknown in the pages of history,
as a casual examination of the sacred books of almost any religion will
show. Moreover, the student will see that to the effect of certain
principles of psychic influence there needs but to be added the principles
of telepathic communication, or, better still, the principles of astral
communication by some phases of clairvoyance, to account for the entire
phenomena of "absent healing."

Space is no barrier on the astral plane, as you have seen in the
preceding chapters of this book. Once the en rapport condition is
established between healer and patient, and the rest is simple--the astral
body is induced to energize more actively, and as a result the physical
manifestation is improved and normal functioning restored. Of course, all
this is wonderful enough--all psychic phenomena is, for that matter; but,
we see that we do not have to go outside of established occult laws,
principles and facts in order to account for some of these modern miracles
which have puzzled and perplexed so many good persons who have not known
of the occult teachings, and who fear that the world is being turned
upside down, and Nature's laws overturned by these "new fangled" ideas and
methods.

Perhaps the most simple method of healing by psychic influence is that
which is at the same time the oldest method, i.e., the "laying on of
hands." This method was revived about twenty years ago in America and
Europe by the new school of "magnetic healing" which sprung rapidly into
public favor. The other schools of psychic healing, generally known as
"mental healing," "spiritual healing," "divine healing," etc., generally
frown upon the use of the hands in psychic healing, deeming it "too
material," and too much allied to hypnotism, etc. But this view is quite
bigoted and narrow, for this method has no relation to hypnotism, and,
moreover, it gives the patient the benefit of the flow of prana from the
healer, while at the same time producing the psychic effect on the astral
body, as I have just mentioned.

I take the liberty of quoting here something on this subject from my
little book entitled "The Human Aura." In the chapter of that book devoted
to the consideration of the subject of "Auric Magnetism," I said: "In
cases of magnetic healing, etc., the healer by an effort of his will
(sometimes unconsciously applied) projects a supply of his pranic aura
vibrations into the body of his patient, by way of the nervous system of
the patient, and also by means of what may be called the induction of the
aura itself. The mere presence of a person strongly charged with prana, is
often enough to cause an overflow into the aura of other persons, with a
resulting feeling of new strength and energy. By the use of the hands of
the healer, a heightened effect is produced, by reason of certain
properties inherent in the nervous system of both healer and patient.
There is even a flow of etheric substance from the aura of the healer to
that of the patient, in cases in which the vitality of the latter is very
low. Many a healer has actually, and literally, pumped his life force and
etheric substance into the body of his patient, when the latter was
sinking into the weakness which precedes death, and has by so doing been
able to bring him back to strength and life. This is practically akin to
the transfusion of blood--except that it is upon the psychic plane instead
of the physical."

But the true "magnetic healer" (call him by whatever name you wish) does
not make this pranic treatment the all-in-all of his psychic treatment.
On the contrary it is but the less subtle part, which leads up to the
higher phases. While treating his patients by the laying on of hands, he,
at the same time, strives to induce in the mind of the patient the mental
image of restored health and physical strength; he pictures the diseased
organ as restored to health and normal functioning; he sees the entire
physiological machinery operating properly, the work of nutrition,
assimilation, and excretion going on naturally and normally. By proper
words of advice L and encouragement he awakens hope and confidence in the
mind of the patient, and thus obtains the co-operation of that mind in
connection to his own mental efforts. The astral body responds to this
treatment, and begins to energize the physical organs and cells into
normal activity--and the journey toward health is begun.

[In the little book just mention, "The Human Aura," I gave some valuable
information regarding the influence of colors in psychic healing, which I
do not reproduce here as it is outside the scope and field of the present
lessons. Those who may feel interested in the subject are respectfully
referred to the little manual itself. It is sold for a nominal price by
the publishers of the present work.]

In the form of psychic treatment which comes under the head of Suggestive
Therapeutics, great insistence is laid upon the verbal suggestion to the
patient, on the part of the healer. The patient is told that he will get
well; that his organs will function normally; etc., etc. But the student
of the present lessons will readily see that the only virtue in the spoken
words consists in their power to evoke and induce the mental image of the
desired condition in the mind of the patient. The mental picture thus
evoked produces a corresponding effect in the astral body of the patient,
and sets into operation the materialization of desired results. In
addition, the words produce a strong mental picture in the mind of the
healer himself, and thus give form and strength to his psychic vibrations
which are being poured out toward the patient. This is really the secret
of suggestive treatment.

The many cults of metaphysical healing, in America and Europe, lay great
stress upon what they call "affirmations," which are but statements of the
patient of his or her faith in the healing power of God, or of Mind, or
Spirit, or Principle (different names are used). The patient naturally has
confidence aroused, and as naturally begins to picture the desired
condition; this in turn reacting upon the astral body, and this upon the
physical body or organ. In addition, the healer's mind is also set to work
in the same way, and sets into motion the healing psychic forces in the
way just mentioned. You will notice that the same principle is always
involved and set into operation and manifestation.

There is no particular virtue in the form of affirmation used by the
healer or patient, except the important virtue of being able to arouse
strong mental pictures of restored health, proper functioning, etc. There
is of course this also: certain forms of affirmations or mental statements
are better suited than others to the particular wants of certain persons.
For instance, a very religious person will be aroused better by
affirmations and statements filled with religious sentiments and ideas;
while a person of a purely scientific turn of mind will receive more
benefit from affirmations in which the precise physiological functions are
specifically mentioned; while the person who is fond of mystery and
strange ceremonies will be better served in the affirmations or statements
taken in the form of some magical incantation, etc. The difference,
however, lies in the mind of the patient, rather than in the words
themselves. Words are merely invokers of ideas--symbols of ideas. In
themselves, words are nothing--ideas are everything.

If you wish to treat yourself psychically for some physical disorder, or
if you wish to do good to others in the same way, you have but to put into
operation the general principles of psychic influence herein described.
That is to say, you must first be filled with the strong desire and wish
to make the cure; then you must make a strong mental image of the desired
result, as actually present. (Do not think of it as "going to be;" instead
say and think that it "is now!"); then concentrate the attention firmly
and positively upon the idea. You may aid yourself and others by
affirmations or auto-suggestions (words creating desired ideas and mental
pictures) if you wish--you may get better results in this way. In this
connection, let me remind you that the healing work in many cases consists
largely in placing proper mental pictures in the mind of the patient,
thereby displacing improper and harmful mental pictures of disease, etc.,
which have been given lodgment there before. Many persons are sick because
of improper and harmful mental pictures that they have allowed to be
placed there by the suggestions of others. Fear and dread of disease often
acts to bring about the feared condition, for reasons that you can readily
see.

And, now, finally for the work of "absent healing" by psychic influence. I
can state this to you very simply; it is this: take what I have just told
you regarding personal treatments, and combine it with what I have told
you in previous lessons about "long distance psychic influence"--then you
will have the whole thing. Here is a sample of an effective distant
treatment; or "absent treatment," to use the popular term--it may be
varied and enlarged up to fit individual cases:

Sit quietly in your own room, inducing a calm, peaceful mental attitude
and state. Then (in the way already told you in this book) make a mental
picture of the patient as sitting opposite to you, or lying down in front
of you. If you have never seen the patient, make simply a mental image of
a man, or a woman, as the case may be, and think of the figure as being
the patient. The best practitioners of distant psychic healing produce
such a strong mental image of the patient that they can often actually
"feel" his or her presence. (This of course is the result of a simple
form of clairvoyance.) Then make a strong mental picture of the condition
that you wish to induce in the patient--the healthy physical condition of
the organ, or part or body, as the case may be. See this condition as
existing at the present time, and not as merely to come in the future. At
the same time, you will do well to mentally speak to the patient, just as
you would in case he or she were sitting before you in the physical body.
Tell the patient just what you would in such case. Pour in the
suggestions, or affirmations, or whatever you may wish to call them. In
some cases in which an excellent en rapport condition is established,
patients become aware of the treatment, and sometimes can almost see and
feel the presence of the healer.

A prominent Mental Scientist, of America, instructs his pupils to consider
each of the organs of the patient, or of themselves, as having a separate
intelligence; and, therefore, to "speak up to it" as if it really
understood what was being said to its organ-mind. I would say that such
form of treatment would be calculated to bring about very good results,
indeed. The principle of concentration and mental picturing would be
invoked very strongly in such a case, and the astral counterpart of the
organ should respond to such treatment quickly and effectively. It is an
occult fact that there is mind in every organ and cell of the body, and if
the same is awakened in the astral counterpart, it will respond to the
command, suggestion, or direction. The writer in question evidently is
well acquainted with this occult law, judging from his other writings, and
has simply veiled his knowledge with this easily understood method of
treatment which undoubtedly will "do the work," to use the American term.

Finally, no matter what may be the theory, or method, given in connection
with psychic healing of any or all kinds, you will find the same general
principles underlying it that have been presented over and over again in
this book. In fact, many purely material and physical remedies owe their
success to the fact that they appeal to the imagination of the patient,
and also inspire confidence in him. Anything that will inspire confidence,
faith and hope in the mind of a patient, and will bring to his mind strong
mental pictures of restored health and normal functioning of his
organs--that thing will make for health for him. So, there you have the
whole theory and practice in a sentence!

       *       *       *       *       *

I would remind the student that these are not lessons to be read but once
and then laid aside. In order to get from them all that they contain for
you, you will find it necessary to read them several times, with a
reasonable interval between readings for the knowledge to sink into your
mind. I feel sure that you will find with each reading that there are many
points that you over-looked before. The lessons cover a wide field, with
many little excursions into bye-paths and lanes of thought. I trust that
the reading and study will make you not only a wiser person, but also a
stronger and more efficient one. I thank you for your kind attention, and
trust that we shall meet again in the future.


FINIS.





The Art and Science of
PERSONAL MAGNETISM
By THERON Q. DUMONT
THE SECRET OF FORTUNE,
FAME AND LOVE

_Success can be made more certain by being able to mold minds and to
influence them to act as you wish_.

THE ART AND SCIENCE OF PERSONAL MAGNETISM

By Theron Q. Dumont

A Chicago paper in a recent editorial said: "There are men in this country
in abundance, but good men, while in great demand, are as scarce as the
clams in chowder at a church supper."

A man need not be a college graduate if he is to rise to the height of
power and success. Personal Magnetism will help to control and influence
others.

This book contains 238 pages crammed with most interesting advice on
Personal Magnetism--what it is and how to develop it. It contains 21
chapters dealing with the different phases of the subject. Here are a few
of the chapter headings:

The Mental Phase--The Physical Phase--Physical Magnetism--Mental
Radiation--Mental Atmosphere--The Direct Flash--The Positive Aura--The
Direct Command--The Magnetic Duel--Magnetic Self-Defence--The Power of
Controlling Others

No. 6, 238 Pages, Cloth Bound, Size 5x7.




Medical Hypnotism and Suggestion By Alexr. Verner, F.A.I.P.


This book is full of secrets. It explains what hypnotism (or mesmerism)
is, and gives an interesting outline of its history. It explains the great
value of hypnotism in the cure of disease and in surgical operations. It
tells how to hypnotise a man, how to put him in a trance for a week. There
is an explanation on how to give an hypnotic entertainment for your
friends or on the stage, making your subjects do things such as acting,
singing, speechmaking, things that, in their ordinary state, they would be
unable to do. Further it explains the method of curing bad
habits--drinking, swearing, lying, stealing, gambling, betting, smoking,
envy, hatred, temper, etc.

The author's object in writing this book is to give a brief but accurate
description of Hypnotism and Suggestive Therapeutics, as practiced by the
most advanced schools of the present day; and also to enlighten the public
mind on the great advantages of hypnotism in the treatment of disease, as
compared with the drug method now used in this and other countries. Size
6 x 4-1/2.

No. 12, 37 Pages, Paper Bound--Price Postpaid Outside U.S.A.



THE DEVELOPMENT OF SEERSHIP
THE SCIENCE OF KNOWING THE FUTURE
HINDOO and ORIENTAL METHODS
COMING EVENTS CAST THEIR SHADOWS BEFORE

By Swami Bhakta Vishita (Hindoo Master)

Everyone possesses in the latent state the wonderful faculty of Seership.
This can be developed. You can train yourself so you can foresee events
and be your own adviser--see your own future.

If you want to make the most of yourself, both in a human and divine
sense, you should read this book.

The most profound and conscientious occult work published in years.
Teaches how to pierce the veil--enter at will into the spiritual world and
converse with your loved ones now across the border.

No. 3. 384 Pages, Cloth Bound, Size, 5x7




Practical Mind Reading
By William Walker Atkinson

_A course of Lessons on Thought Transference, Telepathy, Mental Currents,
Mental Rapport, etc_.

This book is full of practical condensed instruction about every phase of
Mind Reading, Telepathy, etc. The exercises and directions are so plain
and simple that they can be understood and demonstrated by any person of
ordinary intelligence.

Here you will find complete instruction in all the latest points about
Mind Reading. It tells how Thought Transference is practiced in the
scientific laboratory as well as by a public performer. It tells you how
to perform feats that will mystify an audience and arouse the deepest
interest and enthusiasm, or how you can conduct telepathic experiments
with your friends right in your own home.

Here are the titles of the lessons and a few of the subjects treated:

THE NATURE OF MIND READING--A vast, mysterious subject; Power of
Etheric Vibrations; Mental wireless telepathy; the mysteries of science;
Action of mind upon mind; The mental battery.

THE PROOFS OF MIND READING--The Psychic post office; Wonderful
results; A convincing experiment.

CONTACT MIND READING--The two classes of mind reading; The simplest
form; Nerve current theory; The truth about public performances.

DEVELOPMENT EXERCISES--How to begin; Rapport conditions--Rhythmic
breathing; Details of finding objects.

PRICE POSTPAID--Outside U.S.A.

No. 8--95 Pages, Paper Bound, Size 6x4-1/2




THE SOLAR PLEXUS or Abdominal Brain
BY THERON Q. DUMONT

Man has four brains, and not merely one, as is commonly believed to be the
case. Each of the four brains have separate characteristics and
distinctive offices and functions.

The Solar Plexus, or Abdominal Brain is situated in the upper part of the
abdomen, behind the stomach, in front of the great artery, and in front of
pillars of the diaphragm.

The Solar Plexus is the great plexus, i.e., network of nerve-fibres, mass
of nerve-substance, etc., of the great sympathetic nervous system. It is
composed of both gray and white nervous substance, or brain-matter,
similar to that of the other three brains of man. It receives and
distributes nerve-impulses and currents to all the abdominal organs, and
supplies the main organs of nutrition, assimilation, etc., with nervous
energy.

It performs a most important work, supplying the nerve-energy which is
required for the process of nutrition, assimilation, growth, etc. In fact,
it is the great powerhouse of physical life-energy. The bodily functions
cannot be performed without it; when it is injured the entire physical
well-being is at once seriously affected; when it receives a severe shock,
death often ensues.

Its name, "solar" was bestowed upon it by reason of its central position;
its filaments extend in all directions to the important abdominal organs,
like the rays of the sun; and it is recognized as being the powerhouse,
and great reservoir of "life force," just as the sun is the great
powerhouse and reservoir of material energy of our solar system.

Not alone modern scientific investigators; but also many very ancient
investigators, such as the oriental occultists and sages, who many
centuries ago recognized certain subtle functions and offices of this
wonderful "fourth brain" of man, and taught their students many valuable
methods of effectively employing its finer forces and hidden energies.

NO. 9, 64 PAGES, PAPER BOUND, SIZE 6x4-1/2 PRICE POSTPAID--OUTSIDE
U.S.A.



HOW TO KNOW YOUR FUTURE
By
Alexr. Verner, F.A.I.P.

As St. Paul points out, man has a natural (or material) body and a
spiritual body. There are also a material world and a spiritual world.
With the eye we can only see material things. To see the spiritual world
we must cultivate the spiritual sight. Seeing spiritual things with the
spiritual sight is called Clairvoyance (or "Second Sight").

You can if you choose, cultivate clairvoyant faculty. If you do, you may
be able to see places and persons in the spiritual world. This may enable
you to describe to your friends, people in spirit life that they have
known here.

It can also help you to see what is going on at a distance in this world.
To see into the past and the future. To obtain hidden information, and to
give advice, of the utmost value. This faculty when properly developed
enables one to trace hidden treasure, to find lost friends, animals, and
property. With the development of Clairvoyance it is also possible to
develop Clairaudience (Spiritual Hearing).

Crystal Gazing means looking into a crystal ball or into something else of
a like kind. When this faculty is developed one sees a picture or image in
the crystal. Presently the picture will dissolve and another will take its
place. All the above matter is described in this book.

No. 15, 42 Pages, Paper Bound, Size 6x4-1/2.

Price Postpaid--Outside U.S.A.



How to Converse with Spirit Friends
By
Alexr. Verner, F.A.I.P.


A medium is a person whose presence is necessary before a spirit can
communicate. "How To Converse With Spirit Friends" tells you how you may
develop mediumistic powers, so as to be able to receive messages from the
other world when sitting alone.

The book also tells you about different kinds of spirits, including
apparitions (ghosts) and spirit guides (the spirit friends that are
constantly with each of us); about spirit control (how spirits work
through the organisms of mediums); and about spirit-given premonitions,
warnings, death-signs, etc. The work, moreover, gives other interesting
and valuable matter. This work is calculated to "comfort those that
mourn."

This book is printed in very legible type and contains illustrations to
bring out points. One of the illustrations shows spirit forms as seen by a
medium. Size 6x4-1/2

No. 14, 36 Pages, Paper Bound--Price Postpaid Outside U.S.A./b>



THE POWER OF CONCENTRATION
By Theron Q. Dumont

_It is of the utmost value to learn how to concentrate. To make the
greatest success of anything, you must be able to center your entire
thought upon the idea you are working on. The person who is able to
concentrate, utilizes all constructive thoughts and shuts out all
destructive ones. The greatest man would accomplish nothing if he lacked
concentration._

TWENTY FAMOUS LESSONS IN CONCENTRATION

In these twenty lessons, this famous author gives you in simple, concrete
form the results of his lifetime investigations. He shows you how to
acquire that mental quality of concentration which has made world-known
leaders. He shows you how to focus your ideas, to get away from mind
wandering, to eliminate day dreams--how to use your mind like an
ever-ready tool and to accomplish in hours what the man without this
ability does only in weeks or months. He tells clearly why some men lead,
while others with equal intelligence remain in the ranks. He shows the
clear way to make the utmost out of your mentality. No degree of success,
within reason, is impossible when one possesses the Power of
Concentration.

Read the principles laid down so clearly by Professor Dumont. Practice the
exercises which he has so carefully worked out. This training is as much a
guarantee of success as any other method known. Simply learn to use your
brains--learn to focus, to concentrate and the highway to bigger things is
open to you.

A FEW OF THE TOPICS

Opportunities Made Through Concentration. (Shows the plain road to the
top.) Self Mastery. (How to centralize attention.) Training the Will. (A
mighty force at your disposal.) Mental Poise. (How to command conditions.)
Business Success. (How to coordinate forces by concentration.) Attaining
Wealth. (How to attract money bringing factors.) How Courage is Gained.
(Use of concentration to drive out fear.) Memory by Concentration. (A very
valuable lesson.) Practical Exercises. (The actual application of the
principles of concentration.) Many more topics all as interesting and
important as those listed.

No. 5--186 Pages, Cloth Bound, Size 5x7 Price Postpaid--Outside U.S.A.



DYNAMIC THOUGHT
How to Develop your Personality
By
Henry Thomas Hamblin

This book develops your personality and the personal power that sways and
compels and gives you a powerful influence over the minds of others.

Dynamic Thought reveals new and marvelous facts about the human system.
Men and women achieve success according to the development of their own
powers. You have as much power within you as anyone, but it is lying
dormant; and this development can be attained.

There are certain definite principles that rule human beings in their
attitude toward each other. When once you understand these principles you
can convert enemies into friends and can make almost everyone be friendly
toward you.

No 1 298 pages, Cloth Bound, Size 5x7. Price Postpaid--Outside U.S.A.


Mental Influence
By William Walker Atkinson

_A course of Lessons on Mental Vibration, Psychic Influence, Personal
Magnetism, Fascination, Psychic Self-Protection, etc._

LESSON 1.--Why one mind can be made to influence another.
LESSON 2.--How thought waves manifest, and how they affect other persons.
LESSON 3.--How mental states are transmitted.
LESSON 4.--What mental concentration is, and how it works. The occult
teachings regarding developing the powers of concentration. A course of
training described and explained.
LESSON 5.--How occultists form a mental image.
LESSON 6.--The secret of mental fascination and personal magnetism. Why
some have such a charming, irresistible influence. How it can be
cultivated.
LESSON 7.--Difference between fascination and hypnotism. How hypnotic
influence upon others affects the person. The truth about hypnotism.
LESSON 8.--Influencing at a distance. How you can exert a mental influence
upon others at a distance. How distant treatments are given. The most
effective occult methods and practices.
LESSON 9.--How mental influence may be used to affect a great number of
people at the same time.
LESSON 10.--The need of instruction on the part of the public.

No. 7--96 Pages, Paper Bound, Size 6x4-1/2


SUCCESS AND HAPPINESS
BY
SWAMI BRAHMA

_A guide to Success in matters relating to Health, Friendship, Love,
Marriage, etc._

"Success and Happiness" tells you how to develop magnetism and to
strengthen your will. It tells you how to influence people to act as you
so desire. It gives suggestions on how to relieve pain without medicine.

No matter what your condition or position may be, "Success and Happiness"
tells you how you may improve it. It gives you plain directions as to how
to achieve success tin friendship, love, matrimony, and business; how to
make money and how to secure happiness.

Send for this book at once and learn how magnetism and will-power enable
people to achieve success.

No. 16, 40 Pages, Paper Bound, Size 6x4-1/2 Price Postpaid--Outside
U.S.A.


GENUINE MEDIUMSHIP
THE INVISIBLE POWERS
BY
SWAMI BHAKTA VISHITA

This book will prove invaluable to anyone who feels that they might have
any kind of psychic power. It contains lengthy discussion of the
following:

Mental vibrations and transmission--Thought transference--Clairvoyance and
kindred phenomena--Mediumship--Mediumistic conditions--How to develop
mediumship--Mediumistic phenomena--Higher spirit manifestations.

This work explains clearly how to develop "mediumship." It tells how to
form a "medium" circle. Questioning the spirits, the spirit communication
code, persistent watchful waiting, building lines of communication.

No 2, 277 pages. Cloth Bound, Size 5x7.



PRACTICAL
PSYCHOMANCY AND
CRYSTAL GAZING
BY
WILLIAM WALKER ATKINSON

_A Series of Eleven Lessons on the Psychic; Phenomena of Distant Sensing,
Clairvoyance, Psychometry, Crystal Gazing, etc._

PARTIAL SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS:

Scientific principles underlying Psychomancy, Sensing objects by the
Astral Senses. Projection of the Astral Body.

HOW TO DEVELOP YOURSELF. Development Methods. Concentration.
Visualization. Psychometry. How to use the Crystal and Mirror. General
Instruction.

Simple and Space Psychomancy and their difference. Seeing Through Solid
Objects. Seeing Down Into the Earth. Diagnosis of Disease by Psychomancy.

THE ASTRAL TUBE.

PSYCHOMETRY. Five Methods.

Various forms of Crystal Gazing. Directions of "How to Do It," etc.

ASTRAL PROJECTION. What the Trained Experimenter may do.

SPACE PSYCHOMANCY. What may be accomplished by means of it.

Sensing the scenes, occurrences and objects of the Past, by Astral Vision.

FUTURE TIME PSYCHOMANCY. Future events cast their shadows before.

DREAM PSYCHOMANCY. This lesson will explain many instances in your
own experience.

This most interesting study is stated clearly, so that all may readily
understand the fundamental principle of Psychic communication.

No. 20--Paper Bound, 93 Pages, Size 6x4-1/2 Price Postpaid--Outside
U.S.A.



TABLE RAPPING
AND
AUTOMATIC WRITING
By
Alexr. Verner, F.A.I.P

Founder and Principal of the British Psychological Institute


"If a man die, shall he live again?" Does death end all: or is it merely
"the gate of life"? If there be a next world, can we communicate with
those that are in it?

These are questions that have agitated the minds of millions. "Table
Rapping and Automatic Writing" answers the questions. It also does more,
it tells you how you can answer them. It tells you how to prove there is
another life, and how to open up communication with those who dwell
therein. To the Materialist it says: "Belief is unnecessary. You demand
evidence--here it is."

"Table Rapping and Automatic Writing" gives full instructions on how to
form a Circle for receiving messages from spirit friends; how to enable
spirits to make themselves visible to ordinary sight; how to get written
messages, drawings, etc., from those who have "passed over."

No. 18--25 Pages, Paper Bound, Size 6x4-1/2 Price Postpaid--Outside
U.S.A.


THE
ASTRAL WORLD
_Its Scenery, Dwellers and Phenomena_
By
Swami Panchadasi

Containing treatment on such matter as the following:

CHAPTER I.--The Seven Planes of Being. What is meant by a Plane. A state
rather than a place.
CHAPTER II.--Astral Regions. What is meant by an Astral Region. Where
located.
CHAPTER III.--Reality of the Astral. What one encounters on an astral
journey.
CHAPTER IV.--Passing the Border. Passing out of the physical body. Alone
in the astral body.
CHAPTER V.--Some Lower Sub-Planes. Why the soul sheds. The Astral shell,
bodies without souls, still seemingly alive and conscious.
CHAPTER VI.--Disembodied Souls. The resting place of the souls. Not dead,
but sleeping.
CHAPTER VII.--Scenes of the Astral. How the low entities pass their time.
Punished by their sins not for them.
CHAPTER VIII.--Life and Work on the Astral. Character and occupations of
the Astral Dwellers.
CHAPTER IX.--Higher Planes and beyond. The true home of the soul. The
Heaven worlds.
CHAPTER X.--The Astral Light. What the astral light is. A startling
presentation of a wonderful occult truth.
CHAPTER XI.--Astral Entities. Non-human dwellers on the astral.

No. 10, 94 Pages, Paper Bound, Size 6x4-1/2 PRICE POSTPAID--Outside
U.S.A.



PRACTICAL PSYCHOMETRY
By
Alexr. Verner, F.A.I.P.

There is a great demand for good Psychometrists at the present time, and
in the near future there will be a greater demand for the vast amount of
good that can be done by the God-given science of Psychometry (pronounced
"Si-com-et-rie").

A Psychometrist is a person able to see these scenes, hear these sounds,
read these thoughts, and "sense" these feelings. If therefore, a lock of
hair, a letter, a pocket-knife, or anything belonging to a stranger be
handed to a Psychometrist, he will be able to understand much of the
person's past, present, and future--about their character, disposition,
health, surroundings, capabilities, friends, marriage, business, etc.

In this way very valuable information and advice can be obtained for
oneself or given to others.

Can you Psychometrize? If not, why not learn? You will benefit yourself,
and also astound and help your friends.

Full and complete particulars are contained in this book.

No. 17--25 Pages, Paper Bound, Size 6x4-1/2




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLAIRVOYANCE AND OCCULT POWERS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

