the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.







{pg 193}
The American Missionary

     *     *     *     *     *

July, 1888.

Volume XLII.  No. 7.

     *     *     *     *     *

CONTENTS

  EDITORIAL.
President of the Association.--Paragraphs
Indian Problem.--an Outrage
Wade Hampton
Mr. Cable's Pamphlet
Mrs. Ware
Three Commencements

  THE SOUTH.
Notes in the Saddle, By District Secretary Ryder
Gregory Institute, Wilmington, D.C.
A Day at Tougaloo
Which will be the Under Dog in the Fight
Valued Appreciation

  THE CHINESE.
School Life In China

  BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.
Woman's Temperance Work in the South

  OUR YOUNG FOLKS.
Children's Day at Talladega

  RECEIPTS.

     *     *     *     *     *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

     *     *     *     *     *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.

     *     *     *     *     *

{pg 194}
The American Missionary

American Missionary Association

     *     *     *     *     *

President, Rev. Wm. M. Taylor, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.

Vice-Presidents.

Rev. A.J.F. Behrends, D.D., N.Y.
Rev. Alex. McKenzie, D.D., Mass.
Rev. F.A. Noble, D.D., Ill.
Rev. D.O. Mears, D.D., Mass.
Rev. Henry Hopkins, D.D., Mo.


Corresponding Secretaries.

Rev. M.E. Strieby, D.D., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.
Rev. A.F. Beard, D.D., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

Treasurer.

H.W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

Auditors.

Peter McCartee.
Chas. P. Peirce.


Executive Committee.

John H. Washburn, Chairman.
Addison P. Foster, Secretary.

For Three Years.

Lyman Abbott,
Charles A. Hull,
J.R. Danforth,
Clinton B. Fisk,
Addison P. Foster,

For Two Years.

S.B. Halliday,
Samuel Holmes,
Samuel S. Marples,
Charles L. Mead,
Elbert B. Monroe,

For One Year.

J.E. Rankin,
Wm. H. Ward,
J.W. Cooper,
John H. Washburn,
Edmund L. Champlin.


District Secretaries.

Rev. C.J. Ryder, 21 Cong'l House, Boston.
Rev. J.E. Roy, D.D., 151 Washington Street, Chicago.

Financial Secretary for Indian Missions.

Rev. Chas. W. Shelton.

Secretary of Woman's Bureau.

Miss D.E. Emerson, 56 Reade St., N.Y.

     *     *     *     *     *

                            COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to
the Editor, at the New York Office.

                     DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A
payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

                          FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

     *     *     *     *     *

{pg 195}
The American Missionary.

VOL. XLII.  JULY 1888.  No. 7.

American Missionary Association

     *     *     *     *     *

It gives us great pleasure to announce that, at a recent meeting of
our Executive Committee, Rev. Wm. M. Taylor, D.D., Pastor of the
Broadway Tabernacle, New York, was elected President of the American
Missionary Association.

The death of our late honored President, ex-Governor Washburn,
occurred so short a time before our last Annual Meeting, that no
attempt was there made to elect his successor, but the matter was
referred according to the Constitution, to the Executive Committee.
After mature deliberation and with great unanimity, Dr. Taylor was
elected. A brief extract from his letter accepting the position will
indicate his sympathy with our work, and his heartiness in
co-operating with us in this new relation.

"Your Association, alike by its history in the past and its work in
the present, has a strong hold on my heart. It is doing a work much
needed; one, too, which is intimately connected with the welfare of
the nation, as well as with the future of the races among whom it
specially labors. It has always been a joy to me to plead for it with
my people from my pulpit, and I regard your selection of me as your
President, as one of the highest honors of my life."

     *     *     *     *     *

We are glad to be able to mention, also, the election of Mr. Charles
A. Hull as a member of our Executive Committee, in place of the
honored and respected A.S. Barnes, deceased. Mr. Hull was formerly a
member of the committee, but was compelled to retire on account of
pressure of business. He now returns to his place cheerfully and to
our great satisfaction.

     *     *     *     *     *

_Who reads Missionary Magazines?_--We are glad to know that THE
AMERICAN MISSIONARY has appreciative readers with quick eyes. From the
last numbers we have noticed extracts and quotations in the _New York
Observer_, the _Religious Herald_, the _Advance_, the _New York
Tribune_, and the _New York Times_. We are more than willing.

{pg 196}
     *     *     *     *     *

THE INDIAN PROBLEM.

A good deal of ingenious ciphering has been done in endeavoring to
solve this problem, and, withal, there has been a good deal of honest
and efficient work. The Government has largely increased its
appropriations from year to year, the Dawes Bill and other valuable
legislation have been secured, so that steps looking towards the
citizenship of the Indian have been attained. Appropriations have been
granted to aid him in farming and other industrial pursuits, and it is
not unlikely that in a short time provision will be made for the
education in the common English branches of every Indian child.

But all this is not sufficient. The Indian may have lands and
citizenship and an English education, and yet, if he has no strong
impulse towards civilization, no motive in his heart impelling him to
be an industrious, self-supporting citizen--in short, if he has not a
new heart looking to a new life as a citizen and a man, he will become
a vagabond on the land granted him, and a skeptic in the school in
which he is taught. The next few years will constitute a crisis in the
rapidly changing condition of the Indian, and it is precisely at this
point where the vital element of the Christian life must be infused
into his character. To the Christian public, all other questions
subordinate themselves to this, and this needs, not speculation, but
hard work; legislation cannot do it, the church must; time will not do
it, Christian teaching and example alone can. The vernacular question,
so much agitated recently, is important only as it may hinder this
practical work.

The Indian problem is not perpetual. The Indian must soon be merged
into the American, and whether this shall be for good or for ill, the
church must decide, and decide speedily. We trust, therefore, that our
constituents will aid us to extend, as rapidly as possible, that part
of the work entrusted to us. We do not ask for expensive buildings or
costly plant. We ask for the means to push forward with the teacher
and the preacher among these uncivilized people till, when they come
forth from their present anomalous condition, they shall come forth
practical Christians, as well as intelligent and industrious citizens.

     *     *     *     *     *

AN OUTRAGE.

Prof. G.W. Lawrence, teacher of our school at Jellico, Tenn., a
gentleman of quiet and unobtrusive manners, was brutally assaulted by
a man of that place, and was shot in three places; one ball entered
the wrist and followed up the arm, coming out near the shoulder, a
second went into the back of the shoulder, and a third is probably
lodged in the lungs. The assault occurred May 18th, in the church in
which Mr. Lawrence was holding the school, in the presence of his wife
and scholars. The only provocation {pg 197} alleged, was that he had
gone the night before to ask for the tuition of one of his scholars.
He was met in an angry way by the woman, and the next day the husband,
who does not live with his wife, came to the school and fired the
shots. Prof. Lawrence is the brother-in-law of our highly esteemed and
active Christian worker, Rev. A.A. Myers, who has not only done so
much in promoting school and church work in Kentucky and Tennessee,
but who has also been so zealous in promoting the cause of temperance.
Prof. Lawrence sympathized and co-operated with Mr. Myers in this good
work, and it is believed that liquor and liquor influence had much to
do in inspiring the deed. As all the parties in this transaction were
white, it is not at all probable that the color-line question had
anything to do with it.

The community was moved with intense indignation, and the assassin was
speedily taken to the county jail to escape a lynching. A large
meeting was subsequently held in the Baptist Church, and a committee
was appointed to prosecute the perpetrator. Mr. Lawrence at this
writing is in a very critical condition, but hopes are entertained of
his ultimate recovery.

     *     *     *     *     *

WADE HAMPTON.

We opened the June number of the _Forum_ with the confident
expectation that the article on "_What Negro Supremacy Means_," by
Senator Wade Hampton, would furnish some well-considered and
statesmanlike views on that important topic. We expected to find a
fair, if not an encouraging, statement of the changes that twenty
years have wrought in the educational and property qualifications of
the Negro. But we confess our utter disappointment, in finding that
Senator Wade devotes his entire article to details of the Acts of the
South Carolina Legislature, from 1868 to 1876, in other words, to the
reconstruction or carpet-bag period. He adds, it is true, a quotation
from an address of Abraham Lincoln, but that dates back into the still
remoter past, 1859. Mr. Lincoln learned something better before he
died.

We make no defence of that carpet-bag Legislature, but does not
Senator Wade recognize the change that has taken place in the
condition of the Negro--a change that is going on at an increased
ratio? Would an article be worth much on "What _Anglo-Saxon_ Supremacy
Means," based on extracts from Roman histories in regard to the
ancient Germans? True, the comparison is an extreme one, but it must
be remembered that more progress is now made in human civilization
in one year, than in a century then. But let us confine ourselves
to the facts as they now stand. The present generation of Negroes
in the South has had the aid of the public schools, limited and
inadequate as they are, and it has had the still more valuable aid
of schools sustained by Northern benevolence, supplemented in some
cases {pg 198} by aid from the Southern States, that have furnished
instruction of the best quality in all ranges of study, from primary
to college and professional. From Hampton, Va., to Austin, Texas,
these schools, supported by various religious denominations, with
carefully selected and thoroughly competent teachers from the North,
have been sending forth their graduates as teachers, preachers,
professional and business men. These schools of all grades number more
than two hundred, and a large per cent. of their graduates become
teachers who are giving a mighty uplift to their people. A colored
editor could say truthfully two years ago, "We have preachers learned
and eloquent; we have professors in colleges by hundreds, and
school-masters by thousands; successful farmers, merchants, ministers,
lawyers, editors, educators and physicians." To all this it may be
added that careful estimates place the amount of property on which the
Negroes in the Southern States pay taxes, at one hundred millions of
dollars. Surely this race could now furnish legislators more
intelligent and more interested in the assessment of taxes than in
1868, and the number and quality will be rapidly increased every year.
Senator Hampton might have looked around and ahead, and not backward
only! His article, as it stands, stamps him as a veritable Bourbon;
"he has forgotten nothing and he has learned nothing."

     *     *     *     *     *

MR. CABLE'S PAMPHLET.

A COLORED MAN'S VIEW OF IT.

    Mr. Cable's Pamphlet, "The Negro Question," was sent to an
    educated Christian colored man in the South. We make some
    brief extracts from his letter acknowledging the receipt of
    the pamphlet. He says:

I have read "_The Negro Question_," by Geo. W. Cable, and appreciate
it highly. It is the ablest treatment of the subject intellectually,
morally and judicially that I ever saw. Mr. Cable has dealt with that
_great question_ with the insight of a statesman and a thinker, and
the candor of a true Christian. Oh, how I am vexed and do smart when I
think of the wicked treatment I and my people are subjected to on
account of the God-given color, and by a people claiming and
professing to be Christians! I can hardly believe that any other
people ever bore the names freemen and citizens, and at the same time
were shut out from so many of their rights and liberties as we are.
Our manhood is outraged, our civil and political rights are abused,
our women are robbed of their womanhood and their chastity is
insulted, our aspirations are banded and proscription is held up to
our eyes wherever we go, and enforced against us with Egyptian
exactness and Spartan severity, and the most vexatious and grievous
fact of all is, that the strong arm of the law of the land loses its
power when it comes our turn to receive justice. The law either plays
truant, or openly acknowledges that it has no power to defend us. But
the God of law and {pg 199} justice, who broke down one form of
slavery, will break down this, too. Still, there is a part for us to
do. On this line, as on others, the man who needs help must help
himself while he asks for help.

     *     *     *     *     *

MRS. WARE.

    We honor the memory of the early and self-denying workers
    among the Freedmen. They were ostracised at the South, and
    were scarcely appreciated at the North. Many of them have laid
    down their lives in the service, others were compelled to
    return home on account of ill-health, but others still are
    toiling on, seeing the fruits of their labors in the new
    impulse given to the Negro in his great race struggle. Among
    the earliest and most efficient of these workers was President
    Ware, of Atlanta, now gone to his reward. Mrs. Ware is still
    at the post of duty, and, though in feeble health, clings with
    undiminished interest to her chosen life-work.

    At the recent anniversary of the Atlanta University, the
    meeting of the Alumni, (May 28th), was made pleasant and
    memorable by the presentation to Mrs. Ware of a large portrait
    of herself. It was wholly unexpected to her, and her impromptu
    acknowledgment of the gift was made in the vein of her
    characteristic vivacity and kindness. Among the addresses made
    at the presentation, was one by Mrs. Chase, herself one of our
    earliest and most honored laborers. From this address we are
    permitted to make a few extracts.

It is very significant that at any time during these twenty years of
your life here, it would have been just as delightful to meet and say
the pleasant words that leap to our lips, as it is to say them to-day.
You, whom we delight to honor this afternoon, have held the same post
of honor all these years, but many of us do not know how delightfully
you hold that place, so I, who have known you so long, am asked to
explain, and if this hasty sketch seems too flattering to be given in
your presence, I fear you alone are responsible. If you had put less
into your life for us to admire, we could put less into our expression
of admiration.

We know how you lost early a good mother, and that your father was
taken when you were only eighteen; but the missionary spirit of that
father was repeated in the daughter. We know of your being discouraged
by a missionary Board because applying so young, but of your being
finally accepted, and going to Hampton, reaching that now famous
school even before the veteran--General Armstrong.

Then came the year of teaching at Charleston, a year so full of
privations in those pioneer days, that though repeated calls came to
you from Florida and Georgia, as well as the old fields, you shrank
from farther hardships and decided to remain at home, till one Sunday
morning in Connecticut, twenty years ago, these words were unfolded in
a sermon, "Simon, Son of Jonas, lovest thou me? Yea, Lord, thou
knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my Lambs." How easy
it is for us now to see the beautiful Providence of those wonderful
words finding a swift response in your heart and bringing you at once
to Atlanta. There are those before me now that greeted you then in
Storrs School. How {pg 200} much we might say of that eventful year
when you worked beyond your strength to fit the "A" class for Atlanta
University. We can hardly see how it could have been otherwise than
that the next year you should come to us, the bride of our beloved
President. But position brought no exemption from hard work to either
of you royal workers.

We shall never forget what hosts of friends have been won for the
school by your ready pen and stirring words. And during those sixteen
memorable foundation years of our school, which are so rapidly passing
into history, who can ever know how much of their grand success was
due to you for your devotion to him who created Atlanta University,
and made it what it is? We may know in that "day when He makes up his
jewels."

           *     *     *     *     *

THREE COMMENCEMENTS.

BY A VISITOR.

It has been my privilege to attend in succession the anniversary
exercises at Hampton, Va., Atlanta, Ga., and Howard University,
Washington, D.C. Hampton, as usual, welcomed a crowd of visitors, and
among these a number of distinguished men--Governor Lee of Virginia,
and Senator Dawes, being those most widely known. The visitor sees
here the magical touch of genius in these large and commodious
buildings, the schools, the shops, the houses, the cottages, and,
crowning all, the stately chapel. The plat of the village in which
these are congregated realizes the words,

    "A mighty maze and not without a plan."

The effect of the whole, threaded by winding roads, shaded by trees,
and interspersed with gardens and shrubs, is picturesque and
practically convenient. The main value of Hampton, however, is found
in what is done _within_ these buildings--the teaching, the
industries, the making of character.

The graduating exercises were the great attraction. The addresses and
papers of the pupils did not, perhaps, as a whole, quite come up to
what we have heard in other years, but all were good and some of them
of great excellence. One is always impressed at Hampton with the tone
and local coloring of the addresses. They are tinged and touched by
the work done here, and the races for and by whom it is done. The
titles of some of the pieces show this: "What is expected of a Hampton
Graduate." "Hampton Girls." "Mission Work in Tennessee." "Way down in
Georgia." "Progress of the Oneidas." Of the same sort was the closing
tableau, "The Great Father and his Children," a representation by
Indian students, with the implements or products of the industries
they have learned, applying to the Great Father for admission to his
country. The exercises were closed by eloquent addresses, given by
Rev. Dr. Parkhurst, of New York, one of the Trustees, Governor Lee, of
Virginia, and Senator Dawes.

{pg 201}
Atlanta University now welcomes its visitors to its
beautiful green lawns and fields, which were once red clay washed into
deep gullies. The buildings are convenient and well-kept. The
Baccalaureate sermon, delivered by Professor Francis, was very
appropriate and touching. The commencement exercises were held on
Monday, May 28th, and were attended by a vast concourse of people,
many going away because the building, though large, could not give
them room. The aisles were crowded through all the services. The
audiences were, as usual, made up mostly of colored people.
Heretofore, at times, the dignitaries of the State and city have
graced the platform, but Governor Gordon was out of town, and,
perhaps, if he had been at home, he would not have attended. The
recent excitement about the Glenn Bill, and the withdrawal of the
$8,000, the annual grant of the State, have left the relations
somewhat strained. There is, however, no excitement on that subject.
The State authorities have not yet decided what to do with the fund,
and in the meantime, the University goes quietly forward with its
work. Prof. Bumstead has just succeeded in raising the $16,000
necessary to meet the current expenses of the year.

At the anniversary exercises there were no graduates from the college
department this year. Thirteen pupils, all girls, from the normal
department, read their essays and received their certificates of
graduation. The number of the class is supposed to be unfortunate,
but there was nothing amiss in the quality of the essays they read.
They were all good, but the absence of any male voice left the class
somewhat in the condition of a choir without a baas. There was a
noticeable difference in one respect between the essays on this
occasion and those at Hampton. Here there was no local or race
tone. If I had closed my eyes, I might have thought myself at the
anniversary of a Ladies' Seminary at the North. Scarcely a word or
allusion indicated that these girls belonged to the colored race, and
for that matter their faces scarcely showed it, for the white blood
largely preponderated in most of them. I can well understand why these
pupils should prefer to stand forth not as a distinct race, but as
American and Christian girls. Perhaps that is the higher wisdom, but
it makes the anniversary less distinctive, and inspires less sympathy
and enthusiasm. These girls were plainly dressed, and in that respect
would differ greatly from the graduating class in a Northern Female
Seminary, but they would have no occasion to shrink from a comparison
with their Northern sisters, if propriety of deportment, and
excellence and force of writing were considered.

At the Howard University, we had the opportunity of attending only the
exercises of the graduating class in college. This institution has a
good claim to its title as a University, for it has collegiate,
medical, theological, law and normal departments. The anniversaries of
the theological and medical departments had been held a few days
previously in {pg 202} churches down in the city, and were attended,
as we understand, by large audiences. The college anniversary, on the
other hand, was held in the college chapel, which, while it was well
filled, contained a relatively small audience, and this was made up
mostly of colored people. We hardly appreciate this discrimination as
to the places of holding these anniversaries, for the orations in the
chapel were of a high order, and might well have attracted the
attention of members of Congress and of the numerous visitors in the
crowded city. The graduating class consisted of six persons, one being
a lady and she the only one of the class without apparent admixture of
white blood. The addresses were all orations, and resembled somewhat
the essays in the Atlanta school in presenting almost no touch or
tone of race or local surroundings, the lady's being almost the
only exception. I could not avoid the conviction, that if these
well-trained minds had thrown themselves into topics more nearly
related to their own life and race struggle, there would have been
more fervor in the oratory. But some of these graduates will yet be
heard from as useful laborers in some fields of active Christian work.

     *     *     *     *     *

THE SOUTH.

NOTES IN THE SADDLE.

BY REV. C.J. RYDER, DISTRICT SECRETARY.

I promised, in my February "Notes in the Saddle," to give a brief
account of the mountain campaign which had then just closed. It was
full of most interesting experiences. We began the series of meetings
in the Congregational Church, Jellico, Tenn. The Association was
represented by one of its Corresponding Secretaries, a District
Secretary, and the writer. Beside these brethren from abroad, the
local force of A.M.A. workers was large, and several neighboring
churches of our Congregational faith sent their pastors.

At Jellico, the A.M.A. has planted both a church and a school, and
built a meeting house. The interesting series of meetings, which began
at Jellico, was for the purpose of dedicating the neat Congregational
churches recently built by the Association along this line of
railroad. Preaching services were held every afternoon and evening,
the company of ministers taking turns, as they pushed on from one
church to another. These churches are at Jellico, Pleasant View,
South Williamsburg, Williamsburg, Woodbine, Rockhold and Corbin.
Congregationalism, through the A.M.A., has taken possession of this
whole region in the name of Christ. We can easily hold it in the
interests of broad and evangelical Christianity, if our older
Congregational churches in the East and North arouse themselves to
meet the pressing exigencies, and realize the splendid {pg 203}
possibilities that lie before them in this field _to-day_, but which
will be denied them in the near future.

One very interesting feature of these meetings was the dedication of
a chapel which has been recently added to the Williamsburg church,
and which is used for the infant class of the Sunday-school. This
class had outgrown all the accommodations of the church, in connection
with the other departments of the Sunday-school. It had become a
Sunday-school of itself. This chapel was, therefore, built and
publicly set aside for the service of these little folks.

During these meetings, our honored Corresponding Secretary and
District Secretary pushed through the storms and forded mountain
streams together with the other brethren, that they might keep the
appointments which had been made for them. Dr. Roy's stereopticon
views, which have interested and instructed so many audiences in the
North, he used with great profit during this mountain campaign.

     *     *     *     *     *

Two men called upon Brother Myers, our general missionary in this
mountain region, and requested that he and the writer visit the field,
some fourteen miles away, from which they had come that morning. They
told a thrillingly interesting story of how God's Spirit had entered
their hearts, and stirred them up to desire better things for their
children and their community than they had enjoyed. One of them was a
son of a French Catholic mother, and had early adopted her faith. His
life had been wild and reckless, until he found the Saviour in a
meeting led by an A.M.A. missionary. He was an intelligent man of some
education. He found others ready to join him in a movement for the
elevation of the people. They established a church and organized a
Sunday-school. We pushed over the mountain on horseback, after the
other visiting brethren had left the mountain region, to inspect
personally this field. We found it even as the men had represented it
to be. A little church had been organized and Sunday-school gathered.
I could learn of no other Sunday-school in that region. I heard
afterwards, that one of the old-time preachers warned the people
against the Sunday-school, saying, "It war a heap worse than a dancing
place." This same preacher had a vision, and gave an account of it to
his people. "Two devils," he said, "had been in that country getting
up some sort of an institution that they called a church." He warned
his people against them.

The two men who visited us at Jellico, together with others who had
joined with them in this effort to Christianize and educate this
community, we found busy on a hillside, laying the foundations of the
new "church house." They were enthusiastic in this new movement, which
promised so much to their community. They had drawn up a confession of
faith and covenant, which were evangelical and Congregational. They
reported {pg 204} three thousand people living in the coves and
valleys radiating from the point upon which they had planted their
"church house," absolutely without intelligent Christian instruction
of any kind. There were hundreds of square miles without a church
building of any denomination. This little company had been stirred up
by God's Spirit, and were almost starving for spiritual food. There
was a pathos even in their peculiar mountain vernacular, as one of
them said to me, "I don't understand scarcely a word you uns say. I'm
too old to larn now. I'se done left. But I does want my chilluns to
know somethin'. I tell you, I'd sell my old farm down in the cove so's
to help my chilluns to know somethin'." What a tremendous appeal this
is from the very heart of our country! All they asked was one hundred
dollars, to help them build this Congregational "church house" by the
side of Hickory Creek.

     *     *     *     *     *

While writing these "Notes," there comes flashing over the wires,
the news of this horrible crime committed upon the person of Prof.
G.W. Lawrence, at Jellico. I remember a conversation I had with Mr.
Lawrence during this campaign of which I have been writing. He had
just been offered an important and lucrative position as teacher in
the North. He was a young man of only limited means, and felt almost
that he _must_ go. I told him we could not offer him _financial_
inducements to remain, but it seemed to me that the Lord had called
him to that work, and I did not know where we could find a man to fill
his place. "Very well," he replied, "I will remain." The Christian
hero that he was, he went patiently forward in this self-sacrificing
labor. Now, he has fallen by the hand of a brutal assassin! This awful
crime emphasizes the importance of this work, and calls aloud to us to
send _more_ Christian missionaries into this field, until Christian
light shall displace the darkness of semi-barbarism.

     *     *     *     *     *

Turning a moment from the field in which our missions are planted,
to that from which they are supported, I give three interesting
incidents. In a New England church two young girls came forward after
hearing the story of the A.M.A. work in the dark places of our
country, and pledged fourteen dollars, which they had themselves
gathered by the sale of articles which they had made. A good example.

Another little girl, not ten years old, had one dollar which she had
been saving for sometime. It was her total bank credit. When she heard
of our pressing needs, she slipped her dollar into my hand, asking
that it be spent for the poor children in our field.

A woman, for years an A.M.A. teacher, but now a bed-ridden invalid,
pledges $100 to the work of the Association. What can we not do when
there is so much of Christian self-sacrifice in both departments of
our field?

{pg 205}
     *     *     *     *     *

ANNIVERSARY EXERCISES AT GREGORY INSTITUTE.

WILMINGTON, N.C.

Our anniversary really began May 18, for on the evening of that date
were held the public exercises of the "Gregory Band of Hope." There
are at least 160 members of this Band and they hold fortnightly
meetings.

One of the principal lessons which has to be impressed upon these
children, is the sacredness of the pledge. We feel sure that much has
been gained in this direction the past year. There were those who
would come forward and manfully confess when they had violated any
condition of the pledge. But the good done to the children is not the
only benefit. Through these children, the parents become interested in
temperance. One little boy said, "Since I joined the Band of Hope I
got my papa and mamma to join the pledge too." Many families were
represented by either father or mother, and in many cases by both.
This topic is destined very soon to be of paramount importance in the
training of the colored people.

The week beginning May 21 was given up to examinations. The pupils
have in the main done well. Many of them in advancement and aptness
will compare well with white children. By reason of a re-arrangement
in the course of study, there was no graduating class this year.
However, on the evening of May 25, we had an exhibition given by the
scholars. The stage at the back was prettily draped with the national
colors, and flowers were scattered in profusion everywhere. At the
appointed hour the room was filled with the parents of the pupils and
other friends of the schools. The programme was a miscellaneous one,
made up of tableaux, songs, dialogues and recitations. Some of these
reflected great credit upon the pupils and their teachers. I say
_some_ of them, because some parts were rendered so excellently as to
astonish one who did not expect anything _very_ good from negro
scholars. One beautiful scene was, "Winding the May Pole," by twelve
little girls dressed in white. Another striking piece was, "What
Alcohol has done for the Nations." Different persons in appropriate
costume represented the various nations of Europe and one represented
Africa, each in a short speech stating what havoc alcohol had made.
One young lad caused a good deal of merriment in declaiming "Theology
at the Quarters," in which he drew a picture of the candidate for
heaven being subjected to a close examination before he could be
admitted through the "_Alaplaster_ gate." "The questions," said the
declaimer, "you must answer mighty straight. And de _watermillion_
question gwine to cause a heap o' trouble." When one of these colored
people declaims in the Negro dialect, it is a treat. There is nothing
artificial about it.

The year has been a prosperous one. The school-rooms have been crowded
to their utmost capacity. 312 different pupils have attended during
some part of the year, and average daily attendance has been 230.
{pg 206} Excellent progress has been made. Another teacher is needed.
More and more are the colored people awakening to their real
need--deliverance from the bonds of ignorance. You older people in the
North gave your sons to free the slave from human task-masters. We who
have arisen since the war look upon that as the noblest sacrifice
which the history of our country presents. But there still remains the
great problem of freeing the black man from the slavery of ignorance,
superstition and sin. The work increases upon our hands. The South is
struggling to rise. It has this problem of illiteracy to settle. We
who have grown since the war could not carry a musket in '62, but we
are willing to carry the Speller and the Bible now, and we do not
consider this work one whit less honorable or necessary than the art
of war. Do you?

Wilmington is a city with a population of 25,000. It is estimated that
14,000 of this is colored. Business is increasing fast and population
is gaining proportionately. How what is the import of all this? Large
numbers of colored people will be attracted here. It will be an
objective point for educational work among them. If we already have
300 pupils, the opportunity will then be enlarged many fold. But even
now we need more help. Cannot the friends at home enter upon a course
of self-denial to extend us a little aid?

G.S.R.

     *     *     *     *     *

A DAY AT TOUGALOO.

_Special Correspondence of the St. Louis Globe-Democrat._

Jackson, Miss., May 26.--While the white Mississippians were laying
the corner stone of a Confederate monument at Jackson, the black
Mississippians were holding the closing exercises of their university
at Tougaloo, only seven miles away.

TOUGALOO TO-DAY.

For a wonder the war spared Tougaloo. Less pretentious houses within
sight of it were fired and destroyed by roving squads. But the
mansion, in the midst of a grand grove of oaks, stood intact. When the
war was over, the American Missionary Association acquired 500 acres
of the estate, including the mansion.

At the beginning the building afforded accommodations for both
teachers and students. But at present the mansion is used for the
offices of the institution and for class rooms. Tougaloo has developed
into one of the largest institutions for colored youth in the South.
The mansion, which was the nucleus, is now only one of half a dozen
large structures. To the north of it is Strieby Hall, a long
three-story brick structure. The clay was dug, the brick made, and the
walls laid, chiefly by student labor. To the south is another
three-story dormitory. Another notable {pg 207} structure in the
group is the Ballard School Building, every nail in which was driven
by the students. About these larger buildings are grouped the Ballard
Industrial shops and cottages.

Three hundred and twenty-six students were enrolled at Tougaloo the
past year. The steady growth in the attendance more than keeps pace
with the increase in accommodations. They come from all parts of
Mississippi, Yazoo County of terrible memories furnishing a
representation notable for its numbers. Arkansas, Louisiana and
Tennessee are represented.

A MISSISSIPPI MYSTERY.

Nowhere in the South is the negro so totally a nonentity in politics
as in Mississippi, and yet nowhere in the South is there a colored
institution so heartily commended as is Tougaloo University by the
white Mississippians. This seems odd, hardly credible. Tougaloo is not
a State institution. Mississippi has a system of instruction including
a normal school and other departments for colored youth. And yet every
Legislature makes an appropriation for Tougaloo. The institution's
management reports the use made of the money, and the Governor
appoints a Board of Visitors. This is the extent of State supervision,
and still Mississippi continues to make biennially an appropriation
for the university. The last Legislature cut down the amount somewhat,
but it cut some of the white institutions worse than it did Tougaloo.

Perhaps a stronger evidence of the esteem in which this university is
held by white Mississippi is the social consideration bestowed upon
those connected with the institution. The prejudice which ostracises
"a nigger teacher" and which is so pronounced in most communities
where there is a colored institution, is rarely observable here. On
the Board of Visitors are men of the highest standing, like Col. J.L.
Power, for almost a lifetime the head of the _Clarion_; Oliver
Clifton, the Clerk of the Supreme Court, and F.A. Wolfe, the former
Superintendent of Education. Mr. W.S. Lemly, one of the leading
business men of Jackson, is a member of the Board of Trustees. To
visit Tougaloo is not to lose caste in Jackson society, but is
altogether a proper thing to do.

Of course there is an explanation for this. White Mississippians are
much like white Georgians or white Carolinians in their views on the
race problem and on negro education. Tougaloo's peculiar relation to
the white people must be accounted for by the features in which it
differs from other colored institutions maintained by Northern
societies.

THE SECRET OF IT.

The Rev. Frank G. Woodworth, President of the university, was asked
how he accounted for the exceptional esteem in which Tougaloo is held.
His reply was: "I think the attention which we give to industrial
education has a great deal to do with it. That, and the preparation of
teachers, {pg 208} are two things which we make most prominent in our
work. The white people can see the good effects of the training we
give so plainly that they feel the work we are doing is good."

This view of President Woodworth was abundantly confirmed by
subsequent inquiries among white Mississippians. It is the industrial
education the negroes are receiving there which so thoroughly commends
the university to the dominant race. The shops are considered fully
as important as the class rooms at Tougaloo. Carpentry, painting,
tinning, blacksmithing and wagon-making are taught, not only the
rudiments, but to the extent of turning out finished workmen. The
shops were built by the students and are admirably equipped with
tools. Wagons from the Tougaloo apprentices sell for $60 in Jackson,
and are preferred to the product of first-class wagon-makers.

The desk at which I sit, and which will compare with skilled work
anywhere, was made by one of our students. In the blacksmithing and
wagon-making they learn to take iron and wood in the rough and turn
out a good, substantial wagon. The value to the colored youth of such
training can hardly be over-estimated. They are trained to do skilled
work, to be self-reliant and self-supporting.

THE FARM SCHOOL.

But teaching the trades is but part of the system of industrial
education at Tougaloo. Each boy is required to work at least one hour
a day on the university farm. For all work over that hour the student
receives pay, the highest allowance being 7c. an hour. The farm is not
run to make money, but to educate. The idea is to make the operation
of the farm an object lesson to the students in the better methods of
agriculture and stock raising. Several students, enough to take care
of the steady and continuous farm work, are employed all day on the
farm and attend the night school, but the bulk of the farm labor comes
from the students, who give from one to several hours to it outside of
school. Last year the farm was run with but one man outside of the
student help. The boys, while getting their book learning, tilled
eighty-five acres of corn, fifteen acres of oats, with a second crop
of peas, seventeen acres of cotton, eight acres of peas, three acres
of sorghum, two acres of garden and five acres of berries and orchard.
The stock cared for included 100 head of blooded cattle, forty sheep
and forty swine. The farm furnished the boarding department 14,000
pounds of beef and pork, 84,476 pounds of milk, and other products in
proportion. The university farm stock has a reputation State-wide, and
the exhibits are features of the annual fairs held at Jackson. While
every boy in the institution has to do some daily work on the farm,
there is set apart for the ninth grade a special course of a year in
agricultural instruction designed to make good, practical farmers of
those who take it. So much for the boys.

{pg 209}
The girls get their full share of industrial training at Tougaloo.
They have daily instruction in some branch of household duty, ranging
from dish-washing to canning and preserving. Sewing is taught from the
plain darning and mending to fitting and dressmaking according to the
latest fashion plates. It has come to be well understood that the
Mississippi lady of a house who gets one of the trained students from
Tougaloo has "a perfect treasure."

THE STUDY OF HOUSEKEEPING.

One of the latest additions to the system of industrial training
for girls at the university is a novelty. A cottage has been set
apart--four girls are assigned to it for a month at a time. There they
"keep house" in all details. They not only sweep and clean and cook,
but they buy their supplies, keep account of all household expenses,
and manage as they will have to do when they get homes of their own.
A matron looks closely after the cottage feature, which is intended
to teach neatness and economy and to develop executive ability.

With Tougaloo doing such a work as this, how could the white
Mississippians feel otherwise than kindly toward her. The cry has been
that "education ruins the nigger." It has been asserted over and
over--so many times that most Southerners believe it as true as
gospel--that higher education makes a negro too proud to work. But
here is an education the very central idea of which is work--work with
the hands and the eyes. Here is a university which gives to the State
skilled mechanics vastly superior to those who "pick up" their trades;
farmers who can make two bolls of cotton grow where one grew before;
stockraisers who know all the fine points of the various breeds.
Governor Lowry could well say in his last message to the Mississippi
Legislature:

"This university, by its successful management, commends itself to
your favorable consideration."

At the closing exercises of the year yesterday, Tougaloo took another
step forward. Instead of turning out a class of graduates, the
management increased the course and raised the standard. An
institution which does that is certainly progressive.

Two of the notable things on the programme were an essay by Lucy
Jenkins, on "What Tougaloo Does for the Girls," and an oration by
James Miller on "Industrial Education." Both of them were well
considered, well written and well delivered. The essayist and the
orator were black, not yellow. Their efforts would have done credit
to Anglo-Saxons of corresponding age, North or South. As for the
musical part of the programme--ah, there was melody indeed.

A negro boy named Scott, with all the features of the African strongly
marked, executed a difficult solo with an artistic appreciation which
would have brought enthusiastic plaudits from an audience of critics.

{pg 210}
A TRUE FRIEND OF THE RACE.

And then the Rev. Dr. William Hayne Leavell, of Meridian, arose to
deliver the annual address. What a contrast! Dr. Leavell is a South
Carolinian by birth and a relative of the great Nullifier Hayne. He
comes of one of the proud old Southern families and has the highest
social connections. He stands six feet high, a magnificent specimen of
physical manhood, and as chock full of moral courage as he is of blue
blood. This man left his home, declined an invitation to participate
in the Confederate corner-stone ceremonies, and devoted his birthday
anniversary to Tougaloo. Dr. Leavell is a son-in-law of United States
Senator George, of Mississippi. He is the man who delivered an address
before the Mississippi Legislature last winter, and denounced as
cowards, men who go about with pistols in their hip pockets. And when
the blank looks of amazement went round he rubbed his sentiments in on
the Mississippians and their folly, of making themselves walking
shooting galleries. Coming before the students of Tougaloo yesterday,
Dr. Leavell said:

"My interest in you, in this whole work, grows out of a memory. Your
fathers were the servants of my fathers. I remember that in 1861, when
I was a very small boy, the sound of war went through this land. My
father, kinsmen and friends went forth to battle to keep your fathers
in servitude. I remember that not a few of your fathers knew what that
war meant--that if my fathers succeeded, your fathers would be kept in
servitude forever and my fathers would remain the master class. All
the men that could protect the women and children were away. The
fathers and brothers and friends were away fighting. We were in the
power of your fathers and of some of you gray-headed people that I
see. I remember that when they returned from that war your fathers
gave back to mine the women and children without a hair of their heads
having been harmed. I have remembered this with deep gratitude; and
ever since that time I have felt a deep interest in you. It is
therefore, that I have come in response to the call to be here
to-day."

THE ONLY LOGICAL RESULT.

He proceeded at considerable length with such earnest advice as he
might have given to the assembled students of a white university on
commencement day. After a time he touched upon the special condition
which his audience presented.

"I know," said he, "of no people who have ever lived with a more
difficult problem before them. You have before you the duty of saving
yourselves. Mark what I tell you, no man of another race ever saved a
people. Some man of you, or of your race, has got to go with the
pillar of fire by night and the cloud by day, and, like Moses, lead
you.

"God knows many a man of my race has given his life and service for
{pg 211} yours. And not only these men who fought at the end of a gun
to make you free have given their lives for you, but some of us from
the South, who stood with breasts bared to the bayonets of those who
were marching forward to the support of a great principle. We are
anxious now to do all we can for your advancement. But we of the white
race may do our best. After all we have done for you, it is as when
a man goes with a friend to the brink of the grave; he can go no
further. There is a limit beyond which we cannot go for you, no matter
how great our interest in you. Some man with a skin darker than mine
must take up the work and carry it on."

He said not a word about politics, but later in the day the question
was put to him privately:

"Doctor, suppose these negroes to whom you talked awhile ago become
what you urged them to be--useful, reliant, well-to-do citizens--what
will be their status politically? Will the white people, with all this
progress of the negro in education, in industry, in independence and
in the acquisition of property, acknowledge his political rights?"

"They'll have to, sir," was the prompt and emphatic reply. "This
present condition of affairs can't go on. We know that. As the negro
becomes qualified we've got to admit him to full citizenship."

W.B.S.

     *     *     *     *     *

WHICH WILL BE THE UNDER DOG IN THE FIGHT?

As a member of a Boston Raymond Excursion in January last, I spent
three or four days in New Orleans. The President and a Trustee of
Straight University visited our _side-tracked train_, and invited us
to call at the University. Quite a number accepted the invitation, and
in addition to being shown through the buildings, we were entertained
by the students, under the supervision of the President and
Professors, with hymns, songs and plantation music, with explanation
by the President of the course of studies and progress of the
students. At the close of the reception, it fell to my lot to
acknowledge the civility shown us, which I did in the following words:

In behalf of visitors from the Raymond Excursion, it gives me great
pleasure to express to the officers and students of Straight
University our thanks for the interesting reception we have received
at their hands. We have come from a long way off, for sight-seeing,
and the study of the country, but here we find something more than the
wild mountains, and desolate plains, and border towns, that are to
make up so much of the interest of our journey. Through institutions
like this, a problem suggested to me in one of your streets will find
solution. I visited the Republican State Convention in session, to
see ex-Governor Kellogg, whom I had known in his boyhood among the
Green Mountains, and who was one of {pg 212} the officers of the
convention. While there I listened to several speeches from colored
men, which, for clearness of thought and pathos of oratory, would have
done credit to any public speaker in the country. I have since
learned, with great pleasure, that several of these gentlemen were
graduates of this University. On leaving the convention, when scarcely
a block away, I met a well-dressed gentleman, and naturally fell into
conversation about the convention. The gentleman claimed to have
inherited the blood of Boston, but had lived twenty years in New
Orleans. With respect to the convention, he said: "I tell you, sir,
the white people here will never consent to be governed by a lot of
ignorant Negroes, like those in that convention!" I have thought on
this statement, and coming here, I find its solution. Knowledge is
power, whether its possessor be white or black, and unless the white
people of the South make the education of their children more of a
paramount interest than heretofore, they will find the learning and
muscle, the precedents of wealth, combined in the colored race. The
rural population will find that they need for themselves and their
children a better knowledge than can be acquired from the court-house,
saloon, or the village tavern.

It is an interesting thought, that these students will go from this
institution back to their low-down homes on the borders of rice fields
and cotton plantations, where their fathers and mothers have toiled in
slavery, and by an inspiration that is divine, will dissipate the dark
memories of the past, and will show, by precept and example, that
sanctification of spirit and purity of life will shape the destiny of
their race for coming time. Again we thank you for this interview.

JOHN M. STEARNS

            *     *     *     *     *

VALUED APPRECIATION.

    B.M. Zettler, Esq., who for many years has been in charge of
    the public schools of Macon, Ga., and who has, therefore,
    eminent qualifications for pronouncing judgment in regard to
    schools and school work, has written the following in
    reference to the Lewis Normal Institute of Macon. We are
    always glad to welcome the inspection of our schools by our
    Southern friends, and are specially gratified with their
    approval of our work.

Having had this year for the first time since Lewis School was placed
under your charge, an opportunity to see the institution "from the
inside," I desire to place in your hands a brief statement of my
impressions concerning the school and its work. And while I do this
(without solicitation) for the encouragement of yourself and
associates, I have no objection to the use of the statement in any way
that you may see fit. I confess I was not prepared to see so many
practical, common-sense features in the school. I refer especially to
the well conducted industrial departments, and the prominence given to
moral training.

{pg 213}
The teachers impressed me as being not only qualified, zealous and
skillful, but as possessing a genuine interest in their work that is
as inspiring as it is beautiful and becoming. The results of their
labors as I witnessed them in the closing exercises were such as
always follow where skill, good judgment and zeal are brought to bear.

I am satisfied that you, and the noble ladies associated with you, are
doing a good work among our colored people, and that, too, in a way
that leaves no room with fair-minded men for adverse criticism in any
direction. In leaving our city for the summer vacation, you take with
you my earnest wish that you may have a season of genuine rest and
recuperation and that a kind Providence may return you to us in the
fall, to continue your "labor of love" in Macon.

     *     *     *     *     *

THE CHINESE.

    Our missions in San Francisco observed their thirteenth
    (public) anniversary on Sunday evening, May 30th, at Bethany
    Church. The audience--partly American, partly Chinese--crowded
    not the pews only, but most of the aisles. The service was
    impressive and deeply interesting. Lack of space forbids my
    attempting to describe it in detail, but I forward for the
    readers of the MISSIONARY the following address, delivered by
    Fung Jung, who has recently entered upon work as a missionary
    helper.

    WM. C. POND.

SCHOOL LIFE IN CHINA.

I suppose you would like to hear about the school life of the children
in China. The girls are never sent to school, as the Chinese do not
think it is necessary for girls to be educated. Nearly every boy is
sent to school at about the same age as your American boys, six or
seven. From this time the boy's playing days are over. If the teacher
sees or hears that any one has been playing after the school hour, he
would be severely punished. What would your American boys think of
such treatment?

School begins at the first dawning of light, and closes when we can
see to read no more. No intermission is allowed, excepting for the
pupils to go home to get their meals. The first thing in the morning
we begin to study the book of Confucius, all the pupils studying
aloud. We shall have to recite to the teacher very soon. When we go up
to recite, we must hand the book to the teacher and turn our faces
from him. This gives no chance to see which word comes next. This is
called backing the book. The consequences will be very sad should we
fail in reciting our lessons. A new lesson is then assigned if we
recite well. School dismisses for the pupils to go home for breakfast
at 9 o'clock. The writing lesson begins as soon as we come back. We
study again, and write again, {pg 214} and our copy books are
examined by the teacher. The nest time we recite, the teacher picks
out ten of the hardest characters from our lesson to see if we
recognize them. We shall have much trouble this time if we miss. The
teacher will inflict some curious punishment upon us and will say,
"You know this very well, I suppose, but the trouble is, you are too
old to study your lesson, and I am afraid you cannot see; I will give
you a pair of spectacles for a present. Perhaps that may help you to
see." Then he takes some red ink and draws a large circle around both
eyes, and then we may go home for lunch. No one is allowed to clean it
till coming back to school. Hardly any one with such marks wishes to
go home for lunch; every one who saw you would know you had been in
disgrace.

We come back for our afternoon's work. The first part we spend in
writing, and the remainder of the day preparing our lesson for the
next morning. For the slightest offense the children are whipped
severely. The teachers are so strict, that it is no wonder the
children run away from school; some go fishing, or else to the woods
hunting birds' nests. If the boys see anybody not belonging to their
company they will climb up a tree as high as the branch can hide them
from view. All you boys will know the reason we are afraid any one
should see us. I remember running away from school once, but
unfortunately my father sent my sister to the school for me to go home
on business. As she could not find me, my father knew I had not been
to school that day. I went home for lunch about the time school
dismissed. When I got home, the first question my father asked was,
"School dismissed?" I answered, "Yes sir." He then said, "How did you
get along with your lesson?" I answered, "First class." "And who was
the first one in the class to-day?" I answered, "I am, sir." Then I
noticed his voice seemed to have an angry tone, and he said, "Are you
sure you have been to school?" I answered, "Of course I did, do you
think I am a liar?" I got terribly whipped this time, and when I went
to school in the afternoon, I also got a whipping from the teacher. I
did not have any more chance for running away from school this year,
for I was too closely watched. The children of China, you see, have no
pleasant time as you American boys and girls.

The high schools are quite different from the primary. The students
have to lodge and board in the school-house. We get up in the morning
before daybreak to study; the teacher and all the students go to the
explanation hall for our lesson. The teacher explains the meaning of
the lesson, and in the afternoon we are expected to recite and give
the explanation as given by the teacher. This is the hardest work of
the whole day. Our evening lesson is studying essays and poems by
Chinese Princes. About eleven o'clock school closes, and in a very few
minutes I am sure you will find no one awake. In winter time we manage
to get about six hours for sleep, but in summer only about four. We
generally {pg 215} sleep a little while at the noon recess. It would
not be surprising if when the teacher could not see us, we try to take
a little nap in our seat. Each boy has a table to himself. None of the
scholars sit erect as your American custom. Every boy leans his head
upon his hands, so that he can manage to take a little sleep when the
teacher is not looking.

We are allowed two meals a day only, and students cannot tell the cook
to prepare any private lunch. We can have as much tea as we wish. The
only way we can get anything extra is to try and get the cook to buy
it secretly, then it is very hard to get a chance to eat it without
the teacher seeing. I remember once my teacher made a visit to his
friends; usually he came back in about half an hour. When he was gone,
I thought I could make a little lunch, and eat it before he came back.
He came sooner than I expected. When I saw him coming back, I ran to
my seat as fast as I could and left the lunch in the kitchen. When the
teacher found out he told the cook to dish it up and he ate it. When
he finished, he came to us with a smile on his face and said, "Whose
cooking is this? If he tell me I will give him back the money." When I
heard that, I thought it was true, and I never thought the teacher of
the high school would tell stories and deceive me. So I said, "It is
mine." After I said that, he walked slowly back to his seat. I thought
he was going to give me back the money. I did wonder he did not ask me
how much it cost. So I watched him and saw him take up the bundle of
rattans. I guessed what was coming, and I guess I need not tell you
the result. The children of Christian lands have much to be thankful
for. I earnestly hope that soon the children of China will enjoy _all_
the privileges which the Gospel brings.

       *     *     *     *     *

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.K. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.
CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

ME.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. C.A. Woodbury,
Woodfords, Me.

VT.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. Henry
Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

CONN.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171
Capitol Ave., Hartford, Conn.

N.Y.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C.C. Creegan,
Syracuse, N.Y.

ALA.--Woman's Missionary Association, Secretary, Mrs. G.W. Andrews,
Talladega, Ala.

OHIO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Flora K. Regal,
Oberlin, Ohio.

ILL.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151
Washington St., Chicago, Ill.

MICH.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Mary B. Warren,
Lansing, Mich.

WIS.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead,
Wis.

MINN.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs. H.L. Chase, 2,750
Second Ave., South, Minneapolis, Minn.

IOWA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Miss Ella E. Marsh,
Grinnell, Iowa.

KANSAS.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs. Addison
Blanchard, Topeka, Kan.

SOUTH DAKOTA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. S.E. Young,
Sioux Falls, Dak.

{pg 216}
     *     *     *     *     *

WOMAN'S TEMPERANCE WORK IN THE SOUTH.

We regret that the color-line is rigidly drawn in some parts of the
South, at least, in the woman's work for temperance. Too much praise
cannot be given to the white women in the South for their zeal in this
good cause. The day will probably come when they will extend the hand
of fellowship to their equally earnest sisters of the less favored
race, but at present they do not recognize them as fellow-workers in
the same societies. Some of the extracts given below tell this
unpleasant story. All of them, however, show that the colored women,
undeterred by this ostracism, are throwing themselves with zeal and
success into this good work.

STORRS SCHOOL, ATLANTA, GA.

We have a W.C.T.U., also a Band of Hope. Our Union has increased very
much in interest, as well as in numbers, during the year. The Band of
Hope meets every Wednesday. It has a membership of _one hundred and
twenty-five_, and an average attendance of seventy-five or eighty.
Occasionally one or two ladies from the white W.C.T.U. will visit
ours, but our Union is not recognized by the State Union. At one time
a lady, acting then as President of our Union, went to the white
Union, but she was so light that no one could know to what race she
belonged, unless they knew her personally. There were no questions
asked, and I don't suppose any one thought of her being _colored_.
Our colored members would _not_ be admitted. Our teachers _would_
be, _going by themselves_.

TALLADEGA, ALA.

We have a W.C.T.U., also a Loyal Temperance Legion. Our Union is
auxiliary to the Second W.C.T.U. of the State, and we are not
recognized by the First, or distinctively white organization. Colored
members would not be admitted. Indeed I understand that the First
Union has withdrawn from the National, because colored delegates were
received on the same basis as white.

LOUISVILLE, KY.

I endeavored when I first came to L----, to arouse an interest in
temperance work among the people. I visited members of the white
W.C.T.U. They assured me of their interest, and a Y.W.C.T.U. No. 2
was organized among the colored women. They were not anxious to be
associated with the whites, but when the whites insisted that the name
given them should be changed to _Colored_ Y.W.C.T.U., the colored
women refused, and the Union disbanded, since which time it has been
impossible to arouse among them an interest in organized temperance
work, much as it is needed. Colored women would not be admitted as
members of a white Union.

{pg 217}
WILMINGTON, N.C.

We have a Temperance Society of about eighty members, and a Band of
Hope of one hundred and sixty members, no W.C.T.U., and if there were,
it could not have any co-operation with the white societies. Colored
members would not be admitted to white societies.

LETTER FROM A TEACHER IN ATLANTA.

When, last November, Atlanta voted to bring the deadly saloon back to
our quiet streets, she brought also startling revelations of woman's
power. We are accustomed to the refrain of "woman's sceptre," &c.,
with all its dulcet variations, but the wild threats of deluded wives
if their sons or husbands voted for prohibition was a hitherto unheard
of "wail from the inferno." Many an earnest Atlanta woman dates her
re-consecration to the temperance cause from that awful Saturday night
when her frenzied sisters in the public streets joined in the
Bacchanalian revelries over the return of their cruel foe. Woman's
Christian Temperance Unions at once sprang up in various parts of the
city. So much has been done by colored women here, I feel that other
A.M.A. centres may be encouraged by an account of it.

The Woman's Christian Temperance Union of East Atlanta, formed in
1885, is an inspiring gathering to visit, with a membership over
fifty, and the programme of weekly meetings full and interesting.
There are three female physicians in the city who cheerfully address
the Union when desired. The pastor of the First Congregational Church,
once a month, gives up the mid-week prayer meeting entirely into the
hands of this Union. Last week at the close of one of these meetings,
a young man told his sister it was the best prayer meeting he ever
attended in his life. The Temperance Catechism has been thoroughly
taught and illustrated. Committees of women are appointed to visit
homes and solicit members or attendance on the Union. At the close of
the meetings the women have access to a box of leaflets on social
purity, training of children, &c., which they read and return.

Atlanta University has a Y.W.C.T.U., composed of over seventy girls in
the Higher Normal department. I wish our Northern friends could look
into their intelligent faces and watch their eager interest in this
work. A committee for visiting the poor reports every week; the press
superintendent reports her work, and if there is time reads what she
sent to the papers; the social purity superintendent gives a little
talk or has something read on the subject; and the most cheering thing
of all is the report from our literature superintendents, who often
report as many as thirty books or leaflets read during the week from
our little circulating library. This library cost about five dollars.

Every officer in all these four Unions is a Negro except one. They
preside with such intelligence, grace and dignity, that our Southern
white {pg 218} ladies who sometimes visit them are enthusiastic in
their praise. The Unions plan for a mass meeting every three months in
some large church.

Its forty departments of organized work give each a place where she
can do her best, and its opportunities for visiting the lowly are
excellent. To give our money is generous, but to give ourselves is
Christly. House-to-house visitation and personal contact of the
ignorant and unfortunate with those who are only a _little_ wiser and
better, even, is a mighty elevator. A W.C.T.U. visiting committee with
short terms of office, and so including a large number of women during
the year, can, in an _official_ capacity, call on a poor or wayward
sister without antagonizing her or wounding her self-respect.

     *     *     *     *     *

OUR YOUNG FOLKS.

CHILDREN'S DAY AT TALLADEGA.

MRS. H.S. DEFOREST.

A glorious sun ushered in the 29th of April, when for the first time
Children's Day was observed by the College Church. Deft fingers had
adorned the white walls, the chandeliers and the rostrum, with living
green, and from pulpit and organ glowed and burned the roses which
blossomed in rare profusion for this happy day. Early, from every
quarter, flocked the children, many with faces "black, but comely,"
and all in attire neat and clean. Seats reserved for their use were
speedily filled, and as their voices rose in songs of praise, canary
and mocking bird from swinging cages swelled the glad sound. An
ascription of praise to God by the choir opened the exercises, the
pastor following with appropriate Scripture and prayer, and a word as
to the object of the decorations and special service--not for a picnic
or celebration, but that the children might ever remember this day
with solemn and peculiar interest as their very own.

After the chanting by the choir, soft and slow, of "Suffer the little
children to come unto me," twenty children were presented by their
parents for baptism, two of the youngest belonging to officers of
the College. Parents brought two, and even three, little ones, that
the man of God might place upon their foreheads the seal of their
consecration, and in solemn and tender words they were reminded of the
meaning and obligation of the rite.

A second exercise of unusual interest was the presentation of a Bible
to each of the baptized children of the church between the ages of
seven and twelve. To sixteen children, the day was thus made
memorable, the giving being prefaced with fitting remarks, and the
hope being expressed that during the year the new Bible might be read
entirely through. One recipient on reaching home immediately fell to
work, and on being remonstrated with for using his eyes too steadily,
said, "This is too good a {pg 219} Bible to stop reading." Doubtless
all were appreciated in like manner, and will be sacredly treasured.

Short and pertinent addresses, suitable to childhood, were made by
chosen speakers, hymns familiar and appropriate were sung, and the
benediction, pronounced by a Baptist brother, closed a service unique
and unusual.

A grandmother to twenty-three children, of whom three were presented
for baptism, said to the writer, "Oh! I am so happy. We never had
anything like this before, and the children and parents, too, are
_obleeged_ to remember it."

     *     *     *     *     *

RECEIPTS FOR MAY, 1888.


                    MAINE, $722.07.

Augusta. Miss Alice Means S.S. Class,
  for Student Aid, Talladega C.               3.55

Bangor. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.             25.00

Bangor. Miss Wyman's S.S. Class, for
  Oahe Indian Sch.                            5.00

Bangor. Mary F. Duren and others, for
  Rosebud Indian M.                           0.60

Bath. Winter St. Cong. Ch., 157.75; Central
  Cong. Ch. and Soc., 30                    187.75

Calais. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   45.00

Foxcroft. Mrs. D. Blanchard                   1.00

Harpswell. Cong Ch., 18; Sab. Sch. of
  Cong. Ch., for Indian M., 4                22.00

Portland. King's Daughters, by Miss
  Moniton, Sec., Box of Basted Work and
  1 doz. thimbles, for Selma, Ala.

South Berwick. Mrs. K.B. Lewis, 3.50;
  "A Lady in Neb." by John H. Plumer, 2       5.50

Union. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     7.00

Winslow. S.S. of Cong. Ch.                   10.00

Yarmouth. A.H. Burbank, M.D.                 50.00

York. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.               6.00

                                          --------
                                            368.40

LEGACY.

Bethel. Estate of Sarah J. Chapman, by
  A.W. Valentine, Ex.                       353.67

                                          --------
                                           $722.07


                    NEW HAMPSHIRE, $488.29.

Amherst. Cong. Ch.                           37.15

Claremont. Cong. Ch.                         10.50

Concord. West Cong, Ch., 20: J.W.
  Chandler, 1                                21.00

Derry. Nutfield Mission, by Edna A.
  Clarke, Treas., for Schp., Santee Indian
  M.                                         50.00

Dunbarton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for
  Student Aid, Wilmington. N.C.              10.00

East Derry. Mrs. M.G. Pigeon, to const.
  MISS ABBIE M. CHOATE L.M.                  31.00

Exeter. Second Ch., 125; "A Friend." 5      130.00

Exeter. "A Friend," for Talladega C.          5.00

Hollis. Cong. Ch.                            16.25

Jaffrey. Children's Soc. "The Lillies," for
  Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga.                   9.00

Keene. Second Cong. Ch., 26.60; "M.E.S." 10  36.60

Littleton. "The Hillside Gleaners," by Mrs.
  Mrs. S.E. Clay, for Oahe Indian Sch.       40.00

Mount Vernon. J.A. Starrett                   5.00

Nashua. Ladles of Pilgrim Ch., Bbl. and
  Box of C., for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga.

Northwood. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                14.00

Rindge. Cong. Ch.                             4.50

Wilton. Second Cong. Ch.                     15.50

Winchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.               52.79


                    VERMONT, $428.80.

Alburg Springs. Cong. Ch. and Soc.            4.00

Barton Landing. Children's Miss'y Soc.,
  for Indian M., by Kate B. Joslyn, Treas.   12.00

Bellows Falls, Cong. Ch. and Soc., to
  const. CHANCEY ADAMS, CHARLES SAWYER
  and EDWARD G. OSGOOD L.M's                 90.48

Bellows Falls. Mrs. J.M. Dawes, Box
  BOOKS, for Lathrop Library, Sherwood,
  Tenn.

Burlington. Ladies of College St. Ch., by
  Mrs. G.G. Benedict, 8.60; Y.P.S.C.E. of
  First Cong. Ch., 1.84, for McIntosh, Ga.   10.44

Clarendon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 5.00

Cornwall. Cong. Ch.                          56.64

Coventry. Ladles of Cong. Ch., for McIntosh,
  Ga.                                        15.00

Fairlee. "A Friend"                           5.00

Fairlee. Ladles, by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks,
  for McIntosh, Ga.                           5.00

Jericho. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.           11.74

Northfield. Mrs. Mary D. Smith                4.50

Putney. "A few members Cong. Ch." by
  Mrs. A.C. Shattuck, for McIntosh, Ga.       8.00

Saint Albans. Ladies of Cong. Ch., by
  Mrs. M.A. Stranahan, for McIntosh, Ga.     20.00

Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch.            100.00

Saxtons River. Cong. Ch. and Soc.            20.00

Springfield. "Splinters of the Board"
  Mission Circle, by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks,
  for McIntosh, Ga.                           5.00

Waitsfield. Ladies, by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks,
  for McIntosh, Ga.                           7.00

West Randolph. "A Friend," to const.
  MRS. SIDNEY HOWARD L.M.                    30.00

Weston. Cong. Ch.                             4.00

Williston. Sab. Sch. Children's Fund, by
  H.O. Whitney, Treas.                        4.00

Woodstock. Ladies, by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks,
  for McIntosh, Ga.                          11.00


{pg 220}
                    MASSACHUSETTS, $8,282.82.

Amherst. South Cong. Ch.                      6.75

Andover. Joseph W. Smith, 50; "A
  Friend," 10                                60.00

Andover. Free Christian Ch., (of which
  10 for Indian M. and 15 for Mountain
  White Work)                               155.31

Andover. Sab. Sch. of Free Christian Ch.
  for Williamsburg, Ky.                      25.00

Ashfield. Cong. Soc.                         30.55

Belchertown. Mrs. R.W. Walker                 2.00

Boston. Ezra Farnsworth, 500; Miss
  Ida M. Mason, 250; Miss E.F. Mason,
  250; A Friend, 200; E.W. Harper,
  100; Jno. Ritchie, 100; "H.O.H."
  100; Boston, Nat'l. League, 100; J.
  Ingersoll Bowditch, 50; Mrs. Edna D.
  Cheney, 50; "A Friend," 25; "A
  Friend," 25; Miss Abbey W. May, 25;
  Wm. C. Richardson, 25; Louis Prang,
  5, for Atlanta U.              1,805.00

" Howard A. Bridgeman                7.50

" "A Friend"                         5.00

" Mrs. E.P. Eayes                    5.00

" Sab. Sch. Old So. Ch., for
  Student Aid, Fisk U.              40.00

" A.S. Covel, for Student
  Aid, Talladega C.                 25.00

" James H. Beal, for Hospital,
  Indian M.                         25.00

Charlestown. Winthrop Ch. and Soc.  73.23

Dorchester. Mrs. E.T.W. Baker, for
   Hospital Indian M.               75.00
                                 -------- 2,060.73

Boxford. Earnest Workers for Indian M.       20.00

Cambridge. First Ch. and Shepard Soc.       242.25

Cambridge. Young Ladies, Mission Circle of
  No. Av. Cong. Ch., for Schp. Oahe Indian
  M., By Rosa E. Bennett, Treas.             25.00

Cambridge. Prof. J. Henry Thayer, D.D.
  for Atlanta U.                             25.00

Cambridge. M.F. Aiken, for Pleasant Hill,
  Tenn.                                       5.00

Canton. Hon. Elijah A. Morse, for Atlanta    25.00
  U.

Chelsea. First Cong. Ch., for Atlanta U.     50.00

Chelsea. Central Ch.                         17.73

Clinton. Cong. Ch.                           55.00

Clinton. Mrs. M. Haskell, for Talladega C.   25.00

Dedham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.            169.05

Dedham. Allen Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  for Atlanta U.                             55.64

East Bridgewater. Union Sab. Sch., for
  Student Aid, Talladega C.                  12.50

East Weymouth. Mr. Totman, of Cong. Ch.,
  for Petty, Texas                           20.00

Fitchburg. Miss Mattie D. Baldwin's S.S.
  Class, for Atlanta U.                       5.67

Georgetown. Memorial Ch.                     44.32

Georgetown. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  (10 of which for Atlanta U.)               35.00

Hanson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   11.98

Haverhill. Dr. John Crowell's S.S. Class,
  Center Ch., for Student Aid, Fisk U.       30.00

Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 84.40

Holliston. S.S. Class of Young Ladies,
  Cong. Ch., for Student Aid, Talladega C.    5.00

Hyde Park. Cong. Ch., for Atlanta U.         50.00

Lawrence. Sab. Sch. of Trinity Cong. Ch.,
  for Mountain White Work                    20.00

Lee. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                  75.00

Leominster. Cong. Ch., (100 of which for
  Indian M.)                                123.35

Lowell. High St. Ch. and Soc.               159.92

Lunenberg. Evan Cong. Ch.                     8.00

Melrose. Ladies of Cong. Ch., for Talladega,
  Ala., Freight                               1.37

Millbury. Second Cong. Ch.                   72.93

Millbury. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.,
  for Indian M.                              50.00

Millbury. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.,
  for Student Aid, Atlanta U.                25.00

Newburyport. Belleville Cong. Ch., 77;
  North Ch., and Soc., 39                   116.00

Newton Center. Hon. Robert R. Bishop, 25;
  Arthur C. Walworth, 10; J. Caldwell, 5;
  Bertie Morse, brother and sister, 19 ct.,
  for Atlanta U.                             40.19

Newton Center. Maria P. Furber Miss'y Soc.,
  for Indian M.                              20.00

Newton Center. Helen Pray, for Indian M.      0.10

North Amherst. ----.                         10.00

Northampton. First Cong. Ch., 317.68;
  Jared Clark, 20                           337.68

Northampton. Mary A. Burnham School,
  for Hospital, Indian M.                   110.00

Northampton. A.L. Williston, for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn.                                21.00

North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch., to const.
  W.H. HOLT, FRANK HARRIS and JENNIE L.
  DELAND L.M's                              100.00

Northbridge. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.        21.56

North Leominster. Cong. Ch., to const.
  MRS. FRANK FISKE, L.M.                     35.03

Pepperell. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for
  Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga.                  15.00

Reading. Cong. Ch.                           18.00

Rockland. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn.                       25.00

Salem. Young Ladies M.C. of Tab. Ch., for
  Schp., Santee Indian Sch.                  50.00

Shelburne Falls. "American Missionary Aids"
  by Mrs. A.N. Russell                       11.91

Shrewsbury. Cong. Ch., for Indian M.         26.17

South Framingham. So. Cong. Ch., (50 of
  which for Atlanta. U. and 50 for Mountain
  White Work, from R.L. Day)                232.63

Southington, Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., for
  Rosebud Indian M.                           6.45

Somerville. "Friend in Day St. Ch."           5.00

South Weymouth. L.M. Praying Circle of
  Second Cong. Ch.                           17.35

Spencer. Dr. E.W. Norwood, for Student aid,
  Atlanta U.                                 10.00

Spencer. Class of Boys, Cong. S.S., for
  Student Aid, Talladega C.                   3.33

Sunderland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.               21.33

Waltham. Ladies of Cong. Ch., for Talladega
  Ala., Freight                               1.48

Ware. "Friends," 75; Sab. Sch. East Cong.
  Ch., Young Mens' Class, for Schp., 35;
  Young Ladies' Class, 30, for Indian M.    140.00

Ware. East Cong. Ch., for Indian M. add'l.    1.00

West Acton. Rev. J.W. Brown                   5.00

West Boylston. Chas. T. White                 5.00

Westfield. Sab. Sch. of Second Ch., for
  Student Aid, Fisk U.                       66.72

Westford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 17.00

West Springfield. Ladies Mission Circle of
  Park St. Ch., for Pleasant Hill, Tenn.     20.00

West Stockbridge. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  for Student Aid, Atlanta U.                 5.00

Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                        24.59

Winchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
  (146 of which for Indian M.)              165.55

Winchester. Mrs. B.F. Holbrook, for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn.                                 5.00

Worcester. "A Friend in Piedmont Ch."         5.00

Worcester. Philip L. Moen, 100; Albert
  Curtis, 50; E.G. Partridge, 50; Philip W.
  Moen, 50; Stephen Salisbury, 25; Geo. L.
  Newton, 25; "S.E.J.," 25; Hon. P.E.
  Aldrich, 10; Edw'd Hall, 5; A.G. Bullock,
  5; H.D. Foster, 2, for Atlanta U.         347.00

Worcester. Mrs, Abby S. Kimball and Other
  Friends, 35; Mrs. Geo. M. Rice, 35;
  for Sch'p's Indian M.                      70.00

Worcester. Mrs. Abbey Coes, 50; "A Member of
  Union Ch." 5; for Rosebud Indian M.        55.00

Worcester. Mr. Green, 2 Pkg's books, for Library,
  Sherwood, Tenn.

By Charles Marsh, Treas. Hampden
  Benev. Ass'n:
    East Granville                   6.00
    Holyoke. Second                 48.60
    Monson                          35.56
    Springfield. First              20.00
    Springfield. Olivet             36.68
    Westfield. Second               14.46
                                    -----   156.30
                                         ---------
                                         $6,232.82

                    LEGACIES.

Medfield. Estate of Mrs. Abigail Cummings,
  (500 of which for Atlanta U.) by
  Executors                                2000.00

Newton Centre. Estate of Rebecca Parker Ward,
  by Benj. W. Kingsbury                      50.00
                                         ---------
                                         $8,282.82

{pg 221}
                    CLOTHING, ETC. RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

Boston, Mass. Miss H.H. Stanwood, 21
  Valuable Books, for Library, Macon,
  Ga.

Farmingham, Mass. 1 Bbl. for Kittrell,
  N.C.

Hyde Park. Mass. Woman's H.M. Union of
  Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls. Val. 150, for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn.

Lanesville. W.L. Saunders, 1 Box

Shrewsbury. Sab. Sch. of Cong Ch., 1
  Box Books


                    RHODE ISLAND, $11.00.

Providence. Rev. A.F. Keith                  10.00

Providence. Ed. R. Wheeler, for Talladega C.  1.00


                    CONNECTICUT, $4,588.53.

Ansonia. First Cong. Ch.                     36.50

Bethel. Young Ladies Mission Circle, for
  Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga.                      50.00

Bridgeport, Second Cong. Ch.                 80.50

Bridgeport. Young People of Park St. Ch.,
  for Indian M.                               5.00

Bridgeport. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., Box
  Bedding, etc., for Williamsburg, Ky.

Bridgewater. Cong. Ch. and Soc.              11.91

Bristol. "A Friend"                          75.00

Bristol. Ladies Soc., Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.,
  etc., for Thomasville, Ga.

Canterbury. Rev. E.C. Haynes                  5.00

Center Brook and Ivoryton. Second Cong. Ch.
  of Say Brook, to const. DEA. GILBERT F.
  BUCKINGHAM, L.M.                           50.47

Colchester. W.C.T.U., Talladega, Ala.,
  freight                                     1.38

Darien. Ladies Soc., by Miss Ellen M. Nash,
  for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga.                  10.00

East Granby. "Ladies" 3; Mission Band, 2;
  by Mrs. E.H. Strong, for Conn. Ind'l
  Sch., Ga.                                   5.00

East Haven. Cong. Ch.                        12.44

East Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.           20.00

Enfield. "Friends in Cong. Ch.," 56.88
  ----, for Hospital, 15, "Birthday Gifts,"
  9.70, for Indian M.                        81.58

Enfield. Albert Abbe, for Student Aid,
  Straight U.                                 7.00

Essex. "Friends," by C.S. Munger, for
  Oahe Indian Sch.                            3.00

Fairfield. First Cong. Ch.                   36.10

Fair Haven. First Cong. Ch.                  42.00

Gilead. Cong. Ch.                            40.00

Greenwich. "A"                               20.00

Guilford. First Cong. Ch. to const. MISS
  ETTA L. BULLARD L.M.                       30.00

Hampton. Henry G. Taintor, 5; Mrs. Henry
  G. Taintor, 5; ---- 5                      15.00

Hartford. Mrs. Henry Perkins, for Boys'
  Hall, Santee Indian M.                   1000.00

Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., 100; "A
  Friend," 100; Theodore Lyman, 50; Miss
  Charlotte Jewell, 25; Atwood Collins, 25;
  Rev. W.H. Moore, 20; Geo. W. Moore, 20;
  Jona B. Bruce, 20; J.S. Wells, 10; Mrs.
  Pliny Jewell, Sr., 10; Dea. B.E. Hooker,
  10; G.M. Welch, 10; Chas. B. Whiting, 10;
  D.W.C. Pond, 5; Mrs. Chas. F. Howard, 5;
  Abel S. Clark, 5; Chas. E. Thompson, 5,
  for Atlanta U.                            430.00

Hartford. Students Theo. Sem., for Indian
   M.                                        35.00

Hebron. First Cong. Ch.                       9.38

Higganum. Mrs. Susan Gladwin, for Indian M.   5.00

Kensington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 5, bal.
  to const. MRS. IDA R. BENEDICT L.M.; Mrs.
  M. Hotchkiss, 5                            10.00

Middletown. "A.B.C."                          5.00

Middletown. Miss Susan C. Clarke, for
  Atlanta U.                                 30.00

Milton. Friends in Cong. Ch., by Mrs. G.
 Page, for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga.              3.00

New Britain. Mrs. Louisa Nichols, (30 of
  which to const. CHARLES JEWETT, L.M.) 50;
  James W. Cooper, 10; D.N. Camp, 5; F.G.
  Platt, 5; B.N. Comings, 5; Arthur Blake, 2;
  John Wyard, 2; for Jewett Mem. Hall, Grand
  View, Tenn.                                79.00

New Britain. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for
  Tougaloo U.                                75.00

New Britain. L.B. Soc. of So. Cong. Ch.,
  Bbl. of C., Miss M. Stanley, 1.37, for
  Williamsburg, Ky.                           1.37

New Haven. United Cong. Ch., 211.11; E.
  Woolsey, 5                                216.11

New Haven. Young Ladies M. Circle of Center
  Ch., 75; Mrs. Julia Dickerman; 25; Alfred
  Walker, 10; for Hospital Indian M.        110.00

New Haven. F.H. Hart, for Student Aid,
  Talladega C.                               50.00

New Haven. S.J.M. Merwin, 20; "E.H.B." 6;
  John G. North, 5; W.A. Ives, 5; T.T.
  Munger, 2; R.P. Cowles, 2; D.W. Shares, 2;
  "Cash", 1; Rufus S. Picket, 1, for Jewett
  Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn.               44.00

New Haven. Dwight Place Ch. Benev. Soc.
  Bbl. of C., for Macon, Ga.

New London. Mrs. Martha S. Harris, for
  Indian M.                                  20.00

New London. "Friends" Bbl. Table Linen, etc.,
  for Talladega C.

New London. Henry R. Bond, 5; "Cash," 5, for
  Jewett Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn.        10.00

New Milford. Mr. and Mrs. J.S. Turrill       10.00

Nepaug. Cong. Ch.                             6.64

Newington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Student
  Aid, Atlanta U.                           103.08

North Cornwall. Cong. Ch.                    47.35

North Coventry. Cong. Ch.                    35.16

Norfolk. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., for Indian M.  20.00

Norwich. "Cash," 13; W.H. Shields, 5; J.P.
  Barstow, 5; Miss E.S. Gilman, 5; N.L.
  Bishop, 3; W.S. Hempstead, 2; for Jewett
  Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn.               33.00

Norwich. "A Friend," for Atlanta U.           5.00

Norwich Town. Mrs. S.N. Yarrington, for
  Indian M.                                   1.00

Plainville. Cong. Ch.                        96.51

Preston. Long. Soc., for Thomasville, Ga.     5.00

Rockville. First Cong. Ch.                  100.00

Roxbury. Mrs. S.J. Beardsley, Pkg. Patchwork,
  for Sherwood, Tenn.

Sharon. Birthday Box of Cong. Ch., for
  Atlanta U.                                 12.08

Sherman. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  15.00

South Manchester. Cheney Bros., for Atlanta
  U.                                        300.00

Southport. Ladies' Soc. by Miss M.G. Petry,
  for Conn. Ind'l Sch. Ga.                   20.00

Stafford Springs. Sab. Sch., of Cong. Ch.,
  for Student Aid, Fisk U.                   25.00

Stonington. Mrs. Robert Eldred's S.S.
  Class, 6.60; Mrs. Dr. Hyde, 2, "Cash" 1,
  for Talladega C.                            9.60

Suffield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 22.73

Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                         12.35

Thompson. Cong. Ch.                          25.80

Unionville. First Church of Christ           25.51

Washington. Cong. Ch. for Mountain White
  Work                                       38.21

Washington Depot. "S"                        10.00

Westville. Cong. Ch.                         19.00

Windsor Locks. Cong. Ch.                     87.77

----. "Poor Widow in Conn."                   2.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Conn.,
  by Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, Sec.:
     Bridgeport. L.M. Soc. of North
       Ch. for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga. 75.00
     Fairfield. L.M. Soc. of First
      Ch., for Indian M.             45.00
     Griswold. Ladies M. Soc.,
      for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga.      10.00
     Hartford. W.C.H.M.U., in memory
      of Mrs. Charles Ray Palmer,    10.00
                                    ------  130.00
                                          --------
                                         $3,988.53

{pg 222}
                    LEGACIES.

New London. "Trust Estate of Henry P.
  Haven"                                    300.00

Rocky Hill. Estate Of Rev. Asa B. Smith,
  by Rev. Elijah Harmon, Ex.                300.00
                                          --------
                                         $4,588.53


                    NEW YORK, $6,978.25.

Albany. B.W. Johnson, Christmas Cards,
  for Savannah, Ga.

Brooklyn. Central Cong. Soc                1027.26

Brooklyn, Sab. Sch. of Central Cong. Ch.,
  for Indian M.                              37.50

Brooklyn. Thomas Stone, for Talladega C.     20.00

Buffalo. Mrs. Sterling Ely, Box of C.
East Rockaway. Cong. Ch.                      8.00

Fairport. S.E. Dowd, Papers, etc., for
  Savannah, Ga.

Fredonia. Martha L. Stevens                   5.00

Franklin. Cong. Ch., 25; S.G. Smith, 5       30.00

Havana. W.C.T.U., Box Books, etc., for
  Avery Inst.

Homer. B.W. Payne                            10.00

Lima. Miss Clara M. Janes                     1.00

Lisle. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 2 Pkgs
  S.S. Papers, for Savannah, Ga.

Mount Carmel. W.C.T.U., 2 Bbls.
  Books etc., for Avery Inst.

New York. S.T. Gordon                       100.00

New York. H.C. Hulbert, 25; John Gibb, 25;
  S.B. Close, 3, for Talladega C.            53.00

New York. Sab. Sch. of Pilgrim Ch., for
  Atlanta U.                                 10.00

Northville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.           12.00

Norwich. Primary Dep't Sab. Sch. First
  Ch., 2 doz. H'dkfs, for Savannah, Ga.

Oxford. E.L. ENRIGRO, M.D., 30; to const.
  himself L.M.; Cong. Ch., 15                45.00

Port Richmond. S. Squires                     5.00

Rochester. Plymouth Ch.                      52.63

Rochester. "Do What You Can" Mission Band
  Central Pres. Ch. for Student Aid,
  Talladega C.                                5.00

Saratoga. Ladies of Cong. Ch., for Student
  Aid, Talladega C.                          10.00

Sherburne. Box of Library Books, by D.W.
  Teller, for Talladega C.

Sweden. Mission Band, Quilt, etc., for
  Savannah, Ga.

Syracuse. Plym. Cong. Ch.                    35.17

Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel                   10.00

Utica. DWIGHT E. MARVIN, to const, himself
  L.M.                                       30.00

West Bloomfield. Mrs. Sherrell and Friends,
  for Student Aid, Fisk U.                   10.00

Yaphank. Mrs. Hannah M. Overton, for Oahe
  Indian Sch.                                 5.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y., by
  Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treas., for Woman's Work:
     Berkshire. Daisy Band          13.67
     Owego. Ladies' Aux.            21.00
     Moira. Ladies' Aux.             5.00
     Woman's H.M.U. of N.Y.        221.02
     Lockport. W.H.M. Soc.          21.00
     Aquebogne. W.H.M. Soc.          5.00
     Canandaigua. W.H.M. Soc.,
     (70 of which for Schp. Hampton
     Inst.)                        170.00
                                   ------   456.69
                                         ---------
                                         $1,978.25

                    LEGACY.

Niagara Palls. Estate of William H.
  Childs, by Wm. F. Evans, Ex.             5000.00
                                         ---------
                                         $6,978.25


                    NEW JERSEY, $90.35.

Closter. Cong. Ch.                            9.35

Montclair. Cong. Ch., ad'l                    1.00

Montclair. Ladies' Missionary Soc. of
  First Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., for Washington,
  D.C.

Newark. Miss Bleecher, for Student Aid,
  Marion, Ala.                               30.00

Roselle. "A Friend" for Woman's Work         50.00


                    PENNSYLVANIA, $10.00.

Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch., ad'l        10.00


                    OHIO, $1,362.59.

Atwater. Cong. Ch. and Soc., bal. to const.
  MISS FRANK BENJAMIN L.M.                   24.35

Atwater. L.H.M.S. of Cong. Ch., for
  Ponies                                      1.60

Austinburg. Ladies' Soc., by J.C. Miller,
  for Ponies                                  2.00

Berea. Sab, Sch. First Cong. Ch., Box
  Books, Etc., for Sherwood, Tenn.

Claridon. Mrs. C.W. Eames, 5.50; Mrs. M.C.
  Bruce, 2; Miss Olive Bruce, 2;
  W.B. & A.L. Bruce, 2.50; for Student
  Aid, Talladega C.                          12.00

Claridon. Ladies' Soc., by Mrs. Mary C.
  Bruce, for Ponies                           1.00

Cincinnati. Rev. W.H. Warren                  2.00

Cleveland. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.      19.30

Cleveland. C.A. Post, for Student Aid,
  Straight U.                                 5.00

Columbus. First Cong. Ch.                   246.46

Columbus. By Rev. Benj. Talbot, Bound Set
  of "New Englander" from Yale Alumni,
  for Talladega C.

Conneaut. H.E. Pond                           5.00

Cuyanoga Falls. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.       23.46

Donnelville. Ella Purssell, for Student
  Aid, Fisk U.                                5.00

Fredericksburg. First Cong. Ch.               6.00

Greenwich. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., by Anna
  M. Mead, Sec., for Ponies                   1.00

Kellogsville. By Rev. S.R. Dole, for
  Student Aid, Marion, Ala.                   3.25

Madison. "From H.B.F." for Student
  Aid, Talladega C.                         200.00

Madison. W.H.M. Soc. of Central Ch.,
  by Mrs. L.H. Kimball, for Ponies            5.25

Mansfield. F.E. Tracy, for Student Aid,
  Tillotson C. & N. Inst.                     9.00

Medina. W.M.S., by Mrs. O.H. McDowell,
  Treas., for Ponies                          1.55

North Bloomfield. "Earnest Workers," for
  Student Aid, Storrs Sch., Atlanta           9.00

New London. Mrs. C.E. Healy's S.S. Class,
  for Ponies                                  1.00

Oberlin. Rev. C.N. Pond                       3.00

Oberlin. J.L. Burrell, for Indian M.        500.00

Painesville. Pupils Lake Erie Sem., for
  Ponies                                     15.00

Pierpont, By Rev. S.R. Dole, for Student
  Aid, Marion, Ala.                           4.50

Stuebenville. Ladies' Soc., by Mrs. J.
  Campbell, for Ponies                         .50

Tallmadge. First Cong. Ch.                   35.01

Wellington. Edward West                      20.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs.
  Phebe A. Crafts, Treas., for Woman's Work:
     Chardon. W.M.S.                 6.00
     Cincinnati. W.M.S., of
       Walnut Hills Cong. Ch.       15.00
     Cleveland. L.H.M.S. of First
       Ch., for Ponies              10.00
     Elyria. L.H.M.S. of First Ch.   5.00
     Hudson. L.H.M.S.                3.33
     Oberlin. L.A.S. of First Cong.
       Ch.                          78.20
     Oberlin. L.S. of Second Cong.
       Ch., for Ponies              17.30
     Rootstown. L.H.M.S., for
       Ponies                        5.55
                                    ------  140.38


{pg 223}
                    ILLINOIS, $1,059.28.

Buda. J.B. Stewart                          100.00

Chillicothe. R.W. Gilliam                    10.00

Chicago. E.W. Blatchford, for Atlanta U.    300.00

Chicago. Mrs. C.E. Stanley, Pkg. Books;
  A.C. McClurg & Co., Pkg. Books, for
  Lathrop Library, Sherwood, Tenn.

Earlville. Cong. Ch.                         25.15

Evanston. J.M. Williams, for Schp. Fund,
  Fisk U.                                    50.00

Griggsville. Cong. Ch.                       17.96

La Grange. Cong. Ch.                          8.30

Lyndon. Cong. Ch.                            10.00

McLean. Cong. Ch.                             5.80

Peoria. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., for
  Sch'p Fund, Fisk U.                        25.50

Plymouth. Mrs. R.C. Burton                    5.00

Rantoul. W.M.U. of Cong. Ch.                  5.00

Ridge Prairie. Rev. Andrew Kern               2.00

Rockford. Second Cong. Ch.                  267.95

Shabbona. Cong. Ch.                          42.96

Sycamore. Cong. Ch.                          82.24

Wheaton. College Cong. Ch.                    5.00

Woman's Home Miss'y Union of Ill., by
  Mrs. B.F. Leavitt, Treas., for Woman's Work:
     Galva. For Student Aid,
       Talladega C.                 29.20
     Lombard. W.H.M.U.               5.55
     Rockford. First Ch. W.H.M.U.   11.67
     Rockford. Second Ch. W.H.M.U.   2.00
     Stark. W.H.M.U.                 6.00
     Toulon. W.H.M.U.                5.00
     Mobile. W.H.M.U.               25.00
     Oak Park. L.B. Circle          12.00
                                   ------    96.42


                    MICHIGAN, $174.32.

Kalamazoo. Ladies' M. Soc., First Cong.
  Ch., 2 Boxes Bedding, etc., for Talladega C.

Manistee. First Cong. Ch.                    21.60

Mattawan. First Cong. Ch.                     4.45

Saint Clair. Cong. Ch.                       20.00

Vicksburg. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for
  Student Aid, Athens, Ala.                   7.00

Webster. Cong. Ch.                           11.27

Woman's Home Miss'y Union of Mich., by
  Mrs. B.F. Grabill, Treas.:
     Bay City. W.H.M.S.              5.00
     Reed City. W.H.M.S.             5.00
                                    -----    10.00


                    WISCONSIN, $260.95.

Arena. Cong. Ch.                              4.21

Baldwin. Cong. Ch.                            3.00

Beloit. Second Cong. Ch.                     12.75

Black Earth. Cong. Ch.                        5.00

Brandon. Cong. Ch.                           18.21

Elroy. Cong. Ch.                              2.50

Lake Geneva. Y.P.M.S. of Cong. Ch., for
  Student Aid, Fisk U.                       25.00

Madison. First Cong. Ch.                     33.31

Raymond. Cong. Ch.                            5.00

Roberts. Cong. Ch.                            2.75

Union Grove. Cong. Ch.                       17.00

Waukesha. First Cong. Ch.                    36.00

Waukesha. Chas. W. Camp, for freight          2.50

Woman's Home Miss'y Union of Wis., for
  Womans Work:
     Beloit. W.M.S., bal. to const.
       SARAH A. COFFIN L.M.         19.40
     Beloit. W.M.S. of Second Cong.
       Ch.                           7.00
     Arena. W.M.S.                   1.19
     Eau Clair. W.H.M.S.             4.25
     Green Bay. W.H.M.S.            11.00
     Madison. W.H.M.S.               4.88
     Milwaukee. W.H.M.S. of
       Grand Ave. Cong. Ch.         25.00
     Milwaukee. Plymouth Helping
       Hands                        10.00
     Whitewater. L.M.S.              5.00
     Platteville. L.H.M.S.           6.00
                                    -----    93.72


                    IOWA, $381.00.

Afton. H.W. Perrigo                          10.00

Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                     9.61

Davenport. Mrs. M. Willis, Pkg. Patchwork,
  for Sherwood, Tenn.

Des Moines. Plymouth Ch., Bedding, etc.,
  for Talladega C.

Farragut. Lucy S. Chapin, Work Bag and
  6 Hdkf's, for Savannah, Ga.

Grinnell. Cong. Ch., 7.54; Sab. Sch. of
  Cong. Ch., 70                              77.54

Jefferson. Rev. D.B. Eells                    5.00

Mason City. Cong. Ch.                         3.18

Marshalltown. Cong. Ch., for Student
  Aid, Straight U.                           16.81

Monona. Cong. Ch.                             3.04

Muscatine. Cong. Ch.                         54.45

Muscatine. Dr. and Mrs. A.B. Robbins,
  for Talladega C.                            7.50

Ottumwa. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  for Sch'p Fund, Fisk U.                    15.00

Tabor. "A Friend," for Woman's Work           5.00

-----. "Friends," for Oahe Indian Sch.       14.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Iowa,
  for Woman's Work:
     Alden                           1.70
     Charles City. Y.P.S.C.E.        5.00
     Chester Center.                10.00
     Davenport.                     25.00
     Dubuque. Y.P.B. Soc.           10.00
     Des Moines. W.M.S. Plym. Ch.   14.76
     Eldora. L.M.S.                 12.42
     Fairfield.                      2.95
     Grinnell                       11.30
     Lansing Ridge.                  3.00
     Le Mars. L.M.S.                 3.15
     McGregor. W.M.S.                6.30
     Montour.                        3.00
     Magnolia.                       2.65
     Marion. W.M.S.                 25.00
     Mason City. L.M.S.              3.00
     Osage. W.M.S.                   2.81
     Rockford.                        .58
     Sheldon.                        1.00
     Tabor. W.H.M.S.                15.00
     Wells.                          1.25
                                   ------   159.87


                    MINNESOTA, $92.80.

Appleton. Cong. Ch., 4.12 and Sab.
  Sch., .50                                   4.62

Austin. "A Friend," for Atlanta U.            5.00

Freeborn. Cong. Ch.                           3.00

Glyndon. Union Ch., 8.96 and Sab. Sch. 1      9.96

Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., 29.80; Pilgrim
  Cong. Ch., 15                              44.80

Minneapolis. W.M. Bristoll, for Student
  Aid, Atlanta U.                            20.00

Spring Valley, Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.         3.42

Waseca. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Oahe
  Indian Sch.                                 2.00


                    MISSOURI, $9.35.

Saint Joseph. James A. Canfield               1.00

St. Louis. Plymouth Ch.                       8.35


                    KANSAS, $22.51.

Cora. Cong. Ch.                               8.50

Melrose. Mrs. M.E.H. Keyes                    1.00

Meriden. J. Rutty                             9.00

Neosha Falls. S.B. Dyckman                    1.00

Paola. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch.                3.01


                    DAKOTA, $136.73.

Huron. First Cong. Ch.                       53.08

De Smet. Phebe M. Weeks                      14.70

Oahe. Cong. Ch., 8.20; Miss Lindeman,
  2.50, for Indian Sch.                      10.70

Oahe. Interest on Endowment, for Indian
  Sch.                                       20.00

Springfield. Cong. Ch.                        1.25

Valley Springs. "Cheerful Workers," by
  W. Howard Watson                            4.00

Yankton. J.R. Sanborn                        25.00

Dakota Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. Sue Fifield, Treas.,
  for Woman's Work:
     Esmond.                         1.00
     Iroquois.                       1.00
     Oahe. Shiloh Ch.                1.00
     Sioux Falls. W.M.S.             5.00
                                    -----     8.00


{pg 224}
                    NEBRASKA, $15.81.

Aten. Cong, Ch.                               1.81

Beatrice. Mrs. Delia B. Hotchkiss            10.00

Bertrand. Cong. Ch.                           3.00

Lincoln. J.M. Denman                          1.00


                    COLORADO, $5.10.

Denver. Rev. R.T. Croas, 5; Judson
  Cross, 10c., for Atlanta U.                 5.10


                    UTAH, $6.00.

Salt Lake City. Phillips Cong. Ch.            6.00


                    ARKANSAS, $5.00.

Little Rock. Ladies M. Soc. of First
  Cong. Ch., for Student Aid, Talladega C.    5.00


                    CALIFORNIA, $10.35.

Lugonia. Mary G. Hale                         5.00

Riverside. C.W. Herron's Class in Sab. Sch.   5.35


                    OREGON, $50.00.

Portland. First Cong. Ch. 30, to const.
  GEORGE H. HIMES L.M.; E. Charevoy, 5       35.00

Salem. Cong. Ch.                             15.00


                    DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $48.83.

Washington. Howard U., M.C. Coll's,
  12.24; Lincoln Memorial Ch., 11.59         23.83

Washington. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch.,
  for Indian M.                              25.00


                    VIRGINIA, $5.65.

Herndon. Cong. Ch.                            5.65


                    KENTUCKY, $163.16.

Williamsburg. Tuition                       163.15


                    NORTH CAROLINA, $189.82.

Nalls. Rev. M.L. Baldwin                       .50

Oaks. Cong. Ch.                               1.12

Pekin. Cong. Ch.                              1.00

Troy. Tuition, 13.25; By S.D. Leak, 1        14.25

Wilmington. Tuition                         157.70

Wilmington. Miss H.L. Fitts, 10.76; Miss
  A.E. Farrington, 4.50, for Student Aid     15.25


                    SOUTH CAROLINA, $210.50.

Charleston. Tuition                         210.50


                    TENNESSEE, $1,307.89.

Chattanooga. Loomis Hart & Co., for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn.                       29.00

Glen Mary. "Friends," by Rev. G.S. Pope       2.60

Grand View. Tuition                          33.70

Jellico. Tuition                             35.00

Jonesboro. Tuition, 3; Rent, 1                4.00

Memphis. Tuition                            381.00

Nashville. Tuition, 529.60; Rent, 6.50      536.10

Nashville. Cong. Ch. Fisk U, for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn.                                 8.64

Pleasant Sill. By Rev. B. Dodge. Mrs.
  Rev. Houston, 10; "A Friend," 2, for
  Pleasant Hill                              12.00

Sherwood. Tuition, 239.75; "Friends," for
  Student Aid, 26.10                        265.85


                    GEORGIA, $800.46.

Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition, 299.25;
  Rent, 2; First Cong. Ch., 10 Birthday
  Offerings, 2.71                           303.96

Atlanta. Wm. A. Haygood, for Atlanta U.      15.00

Macon. Tuition                              191.05

McIntosh. Tuition                            24.70

Marietta. Cong. Ch. 50c. and S.S. 50c.        1.00

Savannah. Tuition                           191.50

Thomasville. Tuition                         73.25


                    ALABAMA, $619.22.

Athens. Tuition                              62.50

Kymulga. Cong. Ch., for Talladega C.          1.25

Marion. Tuition                             167.75

Marion. "Southern Friends," 7; "C.W.L.,"
  1.85; for Sch. at Marion                    8.85

Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                        40.00

Talladega. Tuition                          119.07


                    FLORIDA, $387.13.

Saint Augustine. Pub. Sch. Fund, 287.75;
  Rent, 82; Tuition, 17.75                  369.75

Winter Park. W.H.M. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
  for Student Aid, Talladega C.              17.38


                    LOUISIANA, $321.62.

Hammond. Cong. Ch.                            2.62

New Orleans. Tuition                        319.00


                    MISSISSIPPI, $178.00.

Tougaloo. Tuition, 114; Rent, 54            168.00

Tougaloo. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 5, for
  Chinese M. and 5 for Indian M.             10.00


                    TEXAS, $137.75.

Austin. Tuition, 131.25; Tillotson
  Ch., 2.60                                 133.85

Dodd City. Pilgrim Ch.                         .90

Petty. Bethel Cong. Ch.                       3.00


                    INCOMES, $1,603.55.

Avery Fund, for Mendi M.                     91.35

DeForest Fund, for President's Chair,
  Talladega C.                              353.85

Gen'l Endowment Fund                         30.00

Hammond Fund, for Straight U.                54.52

Hastings Sch'p Fund, for Atlanta U.          12.50

Howard Theo. Fund, for Howard U.            517.02

H.W. Lincoln Sch'p Fund, for Talladega C.    30.00

Luke Mem. Fund, for Talladega C.             10.00

LeMoyne Fund, for Memphis, Tenn.            171.81

Rice Mem. Sch'p Fund, for Talladega C.        9.00

Stone Fund, for Talladega C.                 25.00

Straight U. Sch'p Fund                       72.50

Talladega Theo. Fund                         21.00

Tuthill King Fund, for Berea C.              75.00

  "       "   "    for Atlanta U.           125.00

Yale Library Fund, for Talladega C.           5.00


                    CANADA, $5.00.

Montreal. Chas. Alexander                     5.00


                    FRANCE, $10.00.

Paris. Warren K. Southwick, for Talladega
  C.                                         10.00


                    AFRICA, $5.09.

Bihe. Wm. H. Sanders                          5.00
                                        ==========

Donations                               $17,455.23
Legacies                                  8,003.67
Incomes                                   1,603.55
Tuitions                                  3,968.12
Rents                                       146.50
                                        ----------

           Total for May                $31,176.07
           Total from Oct. 1 to May 31  190,097.27
                                        ==========


                    FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

Subscriptions for May                      $ 38.02
Previously acknowledged                     713.18
                                           -------

        Total                              $751.20
                                           =======

     *     *     *     *     *

H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
56 Reade St., N.Y.

     *     *     *     *     *


[Transcriber's Notes:
 CONTENTS: Wilmington, D.C. corrected to Wilmington, N.C.
 pg 219: Andover. Free Christain Ch. corrected to Christian Ch.]







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 42, NO. 07, JULY, 1888 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

