


THE PILOTS OF POMONA

A Story of the Orkney Islands

by

ROBERT LEIGHTON







CONTENTS

      Chapter I.  In Which I Am Late For School.
     Chapter II.  Andrew Drever's School
    Chapter III.  A Half Holiday.
     Chapter IV.  Sandy Ericson, Pilot.
      Chapter V.  The Hen Harrier.
     Chapter VI.  "Better Gear Than Rats."
    Chapter VII.  What The Shingle Revealed.
   Chapter VIII.  Dividing The Spoil.
     Chapter IX.  Captain Gordon.
      Chapter X.  The Dominie Explains.
     Chapter XI.  My Sister Jessie.
    Chapter XII.  A Tragedy And A Transportation.
   Chapter XIII.  In Which I Receive A Present.
    Chapter XIV.  Thora.
     Chapter XV.  In Which The Viking's Amulet Is Proved.
    Chapter XVI.  Wherein I Go A-Fishing.
   Chapter XVII.  How The Golden Rule Was Kept.
  Chapter XVIII.  The Wreck Of The "Undine."
    Chapter XIX.  Tom Kinlay's Bargain.
     Chapter XX.  The Opposition Boat.
    Chapter XXI.  The Rescue.
   Chapter XXII.  After The Accident.
  Chapter XXIII.  Gray's Inn.
   Chapter XXIV.  Carver Kinlay's Success.
    Chapter XXV.  A Family Removal.
   Chapter XXVI.  A Subterranean Adventure.
  Chapter XXVII.  A Family Misfortune.
 Chapter XXVIII.  Captain Flett Of The "Falcon."
   Chapter XXIX.  In Which The "Falcon" Sets Sail.
    Chapter XXX.  An Orcadian Voyage.
   Chapter XXXI.  An Arctic Waif.
  Chapter XXXII.  The Last Of The "Pilgrim."
 Chapter XXXIII.  The Light In The Gaulton Cave.
  Chapter XXXIV.  Colin Lothian Makes An Accusation.
   Chapter XXXV.  A Search And A Discovery.
  Chapter XXXVI.  Trapped In The Cave.
 Chapter XXXVII.  In Which I Am Put Under Arrest.
Chapter XXXVIII.  Accused Of Murder.
  Chapter XXXIX.  An Unprofessional Inquiry.
     Chapter XL.  Ephraim Quendale.
    Chapter XLI.  The Last Of The Kinlays.
   Chapter XLII.  A Choice Among Three.
  Chapter XLIII.  Thora's Answer.
          Notes.



Chapter I. In Which I Am Late For School.


On a certain bright morning in the month of May, 1843, the little
port of Stromness wore an aspect of unwonted commotion. The great
whaling fleet that every year sailed from this place for the
Greenland fisheries was busily preparing for sea. The sun was
shining over the brown hills of Orphir, and casting a golden sheen
over the calm bay. Out beyond the Holms the whaling ships lay at
anchor, the Blue Peter flying at each forepeak, and between them
and the town many boats were passing to and fro.

I remember the day, not so much in connection with the whaling
ships themselves as by the fact that their sailing fixes upon my
memory the date of other more personal events which I am about to
set forth in the following pages. Indeed, I was altogether
unaffected by the departure of the ships. As I sat on the edge of
one of the tiny stone piers that support the old houses along the
shoreline, my bare feet dangling above the clear green water, I
thought only of my fishing line and of the row of bright-scaled
sillocks that lay on a stone at my side, being quite unmindful that
the school bell had long since begun to ring.

A small boat passed within a few yards of the jetty, rowed by Tom
Kinlay, one of my schoolfellows.

"Now, then, Ericson," he cried out as he saw me; "d'ye not hear the
bell? Hurry up, lad, or you'll be late again. Aha! I'll tell the
dominie that you're sitting there fishing when you should be at the
school. Come away now, or ye'll get your licks."

Without seeming to hear his warning, I drew in my line with a good
young coal fish at the end of it, and quietly counted my catch.
There were just three-and-twenty fish, and I could not resist the
temptation of making up the even two dozen; so I baited my hook
again and cast it into the water, meditating as I did so upon
Kinlay's unnecessary interference.

Now Tom Kinlay, I must tell you, was some twelve months older than
I, and, as I had reason to remember, much taller and stronger. In
our early school days he had exercised a tyranny over me which I
even now recall with feelings partly of indignation against him,
and partly of shame in myself for having so foolishly bent under
the yoke of his oppression. When we went bathing, as we frequently
did, out on the further shores of the bay, he would not scruple to
lead us younger lads into the deepest waters, and, when we were far
beyond our depth and almost exhausted, he would swim behind us and
force us under, for the mere cruel pleasure, I believe, of seeing
our struggles and hearing our cries below the surface. From some
fancied sense of duty we allowed ourselves meekly to serve and obey
him. When we went on a cliff-climbing expedition he would choose to
remain in safety up above on the banks holding the rope, while it
was we who were sent down the dangerous precipice to harry the
sea-birds' nests.

I had not yet forgiven Tom for what he had done a few days earlier
than this spring morning. It happened this way:

Four of us had a boat out on the bay, and we sailed about from
point to point, fancying ourselves sailors voyaging on foreign
seas. Our dinghy, we imagined, was a sailing vessel, and the broad
bay of Stromness represented the Atlantic Ocean. The Outer Holm we
called "America," Graemsay Island was "Africa," and the Ness Point
was "Spain," while a small rock that stood far out in the bay was
"St. Helena." Tom Kinlay was, by his own appointment, our skipper;
Robbie Rosson and Willie Hercus were classed able seamen; and my
dog, Selta, and I were called upon to do duty for both passengers
and cargo, curiously enough, sailing with the ship on every voyage.

We had touched at each of these places in turn, and when we were
homeward bound I was landed at an imaginary port in "Spain." The
boat had pushed off, when I called out to the skipper that I would
walk home to Stromness if he would take the ship into port.

I had returned home and was seated at dinner, when I thought of the
dog and looked about for her. But she had not come back; so I went
down to the jetty at the end of the Anchor Close, to see if I could
discover the boat or any of the lads. Standing there I heard the
dog's bark across the water, and what was my consternation to see
my pet stranded like a castaway on "St. Helena"! She was tethered
by a rope to the rock, and could not escape without help. The tide
was rising, and the rock barely visible above the water. In a few
minutes my dog would be drowned. No boat was near at hand, and
there was nothing for it but that I should swim out to the rescue,
so I had to strip there on the jetty and plunge in. The swim was a
long one, and I reached the rock only just in time. The dog had
been marooned on that little island, but Tom Kinlay had fastened up
the boat and gone home, caring nothing, and neither of the other
lads dared so far offend him as to attempt to rescue poor Selta
without his permission.

As I sat fishing on the pier, I was thinking of Kinlay's attitude
towards me, and wondering if I should ever be able to hold my own
against him in our outdoor intercourse as easily as I certainly
could hold it in our class at school. But soon I was interrupted by
feeling another twitch at my line. I hauled in another sillock; and
having now completed my two dozen fish, I gathered them and my
lines together, thrust my fishhooks into my trousers' pocket, and
went off to school, only staying a few minutes on the way to give
the fish to my sister Jessie, and get my slate and books in
exchange.



Chapter II. Andrew Drever's School


Our schoolhouse was situated on the braeside above the main street
of Stromness. It was a plain stone building with crow-step gables
and a slated roof; and the only indication of its purpose was a
large board over the door, upon which Andrew Drever had himself
imprinted the word "SCHOOL" in bold black letters on a white
ground.

The morning's lessons were already well advanced, as I could hear
by the hum of voices as I approached. Even Peter, the jackdaw, in
his wicker cage at the open doorway, joined in the clatter of
tongues. His quick eye noticed me hurrying to the school, and he
sidled awkwardly along his perch, put out his long black beak
through the bars of his cage, and flapped his wings with
unmistakable signs of welcome.

I was very late; so late that I half dreaded going into the school;
and to discover if possible what humour the schoolmaster was in, I
peeped through the half-open window. In the inner room I could see
old Grace Drever seated with her gray cat beside the peat fire,
busily twirling her spinning wheel. Nearer to me Mr. Drever himself
sat at a high desk, at the side of which hung the inevitable
"tawse;" and I did not fail to notice that this instrument of
torture had already been used that morning, for it still swung with
a gentle motion from side to side, like the pendulum of a lazy
clock.

Lest you should suppose that Andrew Drever was a severe taskmaster,
however, let me here hasten to assure you that his nature was as
sweet as summer. His methods of punishment and reward were the
perfection of justice. In stature he was a small man, but his back
was broad and strong, and his hands were firm and large. His long,
straight hair was as black as the wing of his own jackdaw, and his
cheeks, though thin, had a freshness of colour about them that was
brought there by the bracing breezes of our native hills.

The class was at the Latin exercises, for Latin formed part of our
education, and I could hear Jessie Grey repeating a conjugation. I
saw Tom Kinlay looking absently towards the window where I stood,
and fearing that he would notice me, I moved a step nearer the
door. Then I heard Mr. Drever speak.

"Kinlay," said he, "finish the subjunctive mood, where Jessie Grey
left off."

Tom's trembling voice betrayed his ignorance of the-lesson.

"Regor, I am ruled; regeris, thou--"

"No, no," interrupted the master. "What are you thinking of, boy?
That's the indicative mood. I asked for the subjunctive. Take your
hands out of your pockets, sir, and don't stand there glowering at
the whaling ships. They'll not be away till afternoon. Now, the
subjunctive mood?"

"I can't say it, sir. I could not get it into my head," whined Tom.

"Can't! do you say? Can't! Was there ever such a word?--Here, you,
Halcro Ericson, finish the--Now, where's that lad? Has he not come
to the school yet?"

"No, sir," replied two or three voices.

Now that the schoolmaster's attention had been so drawn to my
absence, I felt more than ever reluctant to enter.

"Where is he? Does anyone know?" asked Mr. Drever.

"Dinna ken, sir," was the weak response.

Then Tom Kinlay, anxious, I suppose, to retrieve his lost ground,
droned out: "He's away down at the shore side, sir. I saw him
fishing."

"Ah! s-sneak!" hissed one of the boys near him; "what for need you
tell?"

"Now, now!" said the master quietly. "None of that. Get along with
the lesson."

He glanced along the row of faces before him.

"Thora Kinlay," he said, "finish the conjugation where Jessie Grey
left off."

I was again at the window.

Mr. Drever looked towards a fair-haired, blue-eyed girl who stood
directly opposite to him. At her throat there was a cowslip--a rare
flower in Orkney. She wore a rough, homespun frock, as all the
other girls did; but, for some reason which I cannot explain, Thora
Kinlay was quite unlike her companions. Such was the refined
gentleness of her nature that I can compare her only with the
tern--the most beautiful, I believe, of all our sea birds.

"Regerer, I might be ruled; regereris, thou mightst be ruled," she
began, and as she repeated the conjugation, I listened with
attention not unmixed with envy, for she was the best scholar in
the whole school.

As Thora concluded, the schoolmaster gave her a word of praise, and
told her to go to the top of the class, while her brother, Tom, was
ordered to the bottom.

Andrew Drever had given these directions, and was leaning with his
elbow on the desk, his chin resting on his hand, when his eye was
attracted by my moving shadow at the doorway; and amid a sudden
silence I entered and took my place at the bottom of the class.

"Good morning, sir!" I said, looking fearlessly into Mr. Drever's
kind face.

"Good morning, Ericson!" said he. "You take your proper place, I
notice. But what is the meaning of this lateness? What excuse have
you this time?"

"I was down at the shore side catching sillocks," I boldly
answered, "and I just stopped to make up the even number."

Robbie Rosson here put his hand to his mouth in the form of a
speaking trumpet, and whispered: "How many did you catch, Hal?"

"Just two dozen," I quietly replied, yet not so quietly but Mr.
Drever heard me.

"Yes, Ericson," said he sternly, "you stay to make up the number of
your fish. But why do you not remember that you have a duty in
making up the number of your class at school?"

"I'm very sorry, sir," I said; "but I'll not do it again."

"See that you do not. I will excuse you this time, but only because
you were at the fishing." Then he added more kindly, "I have myself
lost count of time in the same way. And now let me hear your Latin
lesson."

Fortunately I went through the lesson without mistake, and was
rewarded by being told to go above Tom Kinlay. As I took my place,
however, the next boy to me, Robbie Rosson, gave a great shout of
pain, as though a pin had been stuck into him.

"Hello, hello! What's wrong now?" exclaimed the schoolmaster.

"It's nothing, sir," said Robbie, looking extremely uncomfortable.

"Nothing! What for did you cry out like that, then?"

"'Twas one of my fishhooks stuck in his leg, sir," I explained,
extracting the offending hook from Rosson's trousers, and putting
it back with others into my pocket.

"Give me the hooks!" demanded Mr. Drever, holding out his hand to
receive them. "I don't know what can possess you, bringing such
things to school."

Then before putting the hooks away in his desk, he examined them
with a knowing eye, and I heard him murmur, "Dear me, dear me! You
lads beat everything. I cannot think where ye get such good hooks
from."

The lesson was now changed. We all took our seats at the desks for
arithmetic, and throughout the morning there were few interruptions
further than the necessary disturbance caused by the changing of
places as one or another of us was distinguished for reward.



Chapter III. A Half Holiday.


You will have gathered from Andrew Drever's remark about the
fishhooks that he was something of a fisher. He was a fisher; but
he was also a naturalist, and he varied the hard duties of the
school by making frequent excursions across the hills in search of
objects for his favourite study. In addition to the maps and
diagrams that hung on the whitewashed walls of the schoolroom there
were many cases containing stuffed birds, such as guillemots,
terns, owls, and ouzels; and specimens of the small quadrupeds of
the locality, including a weasel and a fine pair of otters. All of
these specimens had been prepared and stuffed by himself, and upon
a side table by the window he kept a collection of curious stones
and old coins that he had found on his wanderings.

Andrew's heart was in both of his occupations. He loved his birds
and his curiosities, and I think he loved his pupils. Often, as he
sat on his high stool behind his desk, with a severity in his
features which his position seemed to demand, I have seen his brown
eyes soften as they looked round the circle of faces, and I have
known that he had some affection for each one of us. Out of school
hours he took great interest in our pursuits, giving to the girls
advice in the arrangement of colour in their needlework, and to the
boys many a valuable hint for the hooking of trout. He knew no
distinctions of rank or social position. A laird's son was treated
by him with the same dignity or kindness that was shown to the son
of a poor kelp burner; and the coveted seat at the head of the
class was as often occupied by a poor fisherman's lad as by the
better dressed, but not better educated, son of the Inspector of
Fisheries, or the bright little daughter of so great a man as
Lloyd's agent.

Towards the close of morning school, Peter, the jackdaw, announced
by the fluttering of his wings and his chattering that a stranger
was coming to the door, and very soon Mr. Duke, one of the bailies
of the town, entered the school. We had learnt to expect something
good to come of the bailie's visits, and this occasion was no
exception.

He sat down on one of the low forms near Mr. Drever's desk, and
took from his waistcoat pocket a large silver snuffbox.

"Well, Andrew," he cheerily exclaimed, taking a copious pinch
between his finger and thumb and handing the box to the master,
"here's a glorious morning for you, eh? Ay, man, and how are all
your bairns? I see ye aye keep up your number. And who have you at
the head of the class the day? Is it Thora again?"

"Yes," replied Andrew, giving a resounding sneeze and loudly
blowing his nose. "Yes, its just Thora again. She's kept it all the
morning. You see, sir, they all take the same places before the
day's out: whatever way they begin, the smartest are sure to get to
the top."

"Ay, ay, just so," mused the bailie, again opening his snuffbox.
"They're like a pack o' cards--shuffle them as ye will before the
game begins, the honours must still come together at the finish.

"Well, Thora, lassie," he continued, turning round to Thora Kinlay,
"and how are ye all up at Crua Breck?"

"Oh, we're all fine, thank you, sir," said the girl; "only Crumpie
fell over the Neban bank yestreen and broke her leg."

"Ah, indeed! but that's most serious; poor Crumpie!--and that's the
new cow, is it? or is it the old horse?"

"It's the old cow, sir," said Thora, apparently wondering at the
bailie's ignorance.

Then Mr. Duke thrust his hand deep into his pocket and brought it
out again full of keys and money. He selected one of the coins and
handed it to Thora, saying, "There's to you, Thora; that's for
getting to the head of the class."

From his seat he then questioned several of us regarding our
lessons and our homes, and finally he stood up and addressed us
all, saying: "I have come in this morning, bairns, to ask Mr.
Drever to give you all a half holiday. The whaling ships are to
sail by this afternoon's tide, and as many of you have brothers and
fathers aboard, I don't doubt that Mr. Drever will let you away;"
and he added, turning to the master, "What do you say, Andrew?"

"I'm sure, sir," said Mr. Drever, "I have no objections to offer;"
and he looked out through the window as though to satisfy himself
that the weather was suitable for an afternoon's fishing.

Mr. Duke then went into the inner room to have a gossip with old
Grace Drever. The schoolmaster pronounced the benediction, and we
flocked noisily outside.

As I was leaving with Robbie Rosson, Mr. Drever called me back.

"Don't leave the hooks here, Ericson," he said; "you'll be needing
them for the fishing."

And taking the fishhooks from his desk he again examined them
attentively, admiring the fine workmanship displayed in the turn of
their points.

"My lad, these are fine hooks for a sea trout," he continued;
"you'll have gotten them from Kirkwall, no doubt?"

"No," I said. "Father got them from one of the captains. I'd like
if you'd keep some of them, Mr. Drever;" and I offered him three of
the best.

"Oh no, no!" he exclaimed, "I could not think of taking them from
you. I didn't mean that.

"But maybe, well, maybe I might just have the loan of one of them
to try this afternoon. I'm going away to Kirbister to see if I can
catch a few sea trout."

"Kirbister for sea trout!" said I, knowing that on the subject of
fishing I might venture to disagree with even so practised an
angler as Andrew Drever. "If you're seeking sea trout you need go
no further than the Bush. There's not a stream in the Mainland
equal to the Bush. Take the hooks, sir, and I'll warrant you'll
bring home a full basket."

"Well, I'll take your advice and try the Bush, for it's aye the
lads that find out the best waters. Thank you for the hooks,
Halcro. Away with you; and see you're not so late at the school
another morning."

And as I scampered down the brae, I knew that he was watching me
from the door.

In the street I found Tom Kinlay and two other boys waiting for me,
and arranging an excursion across the hills to Skaill Bay to hunt
for seals. It was an expedition in which I very readily agreed to
join, and it was arranged that we should meet early in the
afternoon on the moor between Voy and Crua Breck.



Chapter IV. Sandy Ericson, Pilot.


My home was close beside the school. There were only a few steps to
skip across the narrow main street, and a turn into the Anchor
Close brought me to my mother's door. Many of my companions,
however, had several miles to travel. Tom and Thora Kinlay lived at
Crua Breck farm, distant from Stromness four miles; and little
Hilda Paterson, the youngest girl in the school, lived at her
father's croft away beyond Stenness, and walked the five
miles--barefooted--twice a day.

When I got home the brose for dinner was cooling on the windowsill,
and my mother was frying the fish I had caught in the morning. My
sister Jessie sat near the window plaiting straw--an industry
common in Orkney at that time.

"Hello, Hal! back already?" Jessie exclaimed, putting her work
aside as I threw my books and slate in the corner beside her. "Come
away and look out for father. He has just brought in a new ship."

We went out upon the little jetty where I had fished in the
morning, at the extremity of the passage in which our house stood,
and there we waited and watched for my father's boat.

With this stone pier my earliest recollections were connected. When
I was but an infant my father had carried me out in his great
strong arms, and for the first time showed me the sun rising over
the furrowed hills of Orphir. He had directed my childish eyes to
the deep green of the sea water as it rippled gently against the
wall of our house. It was here that, as a boy, I had, by rolling
over the pier like a ball, made a more intimate acquaintance with
the element that was to be as familiar to me as my native air.
Here, too, I had caught my first fish, and hence despatched to
unknown lands my little fleet of wooden boats with their quaint
paper sails.

The ship that my father had just brought into port was a trim
barque, with high, tapering masts and a bright-green hull.

"What's her name, Hal?" inquired Jessie as the vessel was brought
to.

I had accustomed myself to make out ships' names at great
distances, and as the barque swung round with the stream I could
read the words "Lydia of Leith" painted on her counter.

"Yonder is father, and there is Uncle Mansie," said Jessie, as the
two men climbed over the ship's rail and swarmed down into the
boat. Then up went the brown sail, and the little Curlew sped
blithely past the whaling ships and across the broad bay, and it
was not long ere she was moored alongside our jetty and father
stepped ashore.

My father was a tall, muscular man, with a long, fair beard, and
blue eyes as clear and deep as the summer sky. He was a worthy
representative of the old Norse sea king, from whom he was
descended, and his descent was shown in his great love of the sea.
He was the chief pilot of the port of Stromness, and no man knew so
well as he all the dangerous currents and shoals of the Orcadian
seas. There was not a flow or a sound between the North and South
Ronaldsays, or from Bore Head in the west to the Start in the east
that he did not know as well as the eagle knows her corrie, or
which he could not navigate on the darkest night. The perils of the
whirlpools, of the sunken rocks, and of the wild winter storms
which beat in fury upon our iron coasts, were part of his life; and
I have heard it said that he had saved more ships from destruction
than any other man in Orkney or Shetland. If you had asked anyone
in Stromness, What man in all Pomona could least be spared? the
reply would have been given, "Sandy Ericson, the pilot."

I need not say that for these reasons I was proud of my brave
father. But it was not from him I learned these things, for he
would never say a word in his own praise, and, had I not heard of
his hardy bravery from other lips, he might have been to me no more
than the gentle, affectionate parent that he ever was.

We left the four men who were the crew of the Curlew to look after
the boat, while Uncle Mansie and father came into the house to
dinner.

When, being the youngest of the family, I had said grace and we
were supping our brose, Uncle Mansie looked over to me and asked:
"Well, Hal, are you coming out in the Curlew with us to see the
whaling ships away?"

I replied in true Orkney fashion by asking another question:

"How far are you to take them?"

Mansie turned to father, who said: "Och, we'll take them as far as
the Braga Rock anyway. If you'll come wi' us, Hal, we'll stow you
snugly in the bow o' the Curlew, and you'll get a fine sail. What's
an Orkney lad, whatever, if he's not to have a taste o' the dangers
o' the sea? There's more for him to do than daunder about the
hillside with a trout wand over his shoulder."

"'Deed, I dinna ken about that, father," said my mother, helping me
to a plateful of fried sillocks. "If it's danger you're wantin' the
laddie to seek, he's seen o'er many dangers already, I'm thinking.
It's nearly drowned he was, only a week ago, in the Barra Flow,
swimming out after a dog that wasna worth the saving; and I have
seen him mysel' dangling over the Breckness cliffs, like a spider,
at the end of a rope I would not have trusted to hang Lucky
Drever's cat with! Danger, forsooth! the laddie is always in
danger."

It was like my mother to object to my taking to the sea, even for
the pleasure of a sail. Although she well knew that it was the only
life open to an Orkney lad, yet she was ever anxious to delay its
beginning, and at these words from her my father did not urge me
further, but quietly watched me as I rose from the table and took
from a rack over the window a small harpoon, the sharp point of
which I tested by pressing it against my thumb.

"Oh, there's a lad!" exclaimed Jessie. "Off to the sealing when he
might have a fine sail in the Curlew. I wish I could get such a
chance."

"All right, lad!" interrupted my father. "Away with you to the
sealing. You'll get many another chance of a sail. Who's going with
you?"

"Robbie Rosson and Willie Hercus and--" I added with some
hesitation, "Tom Kinlay," for I knew my father did not entirely
approve of Tom as a companion.

"Kinlay again?" he muttered, knitting his brows. "I would advise
you not to go with that lad so often. But then you dinna ken what
his father is, I suppose."

It was seldom that I heard my father speak an ill word against any
man. I did not ask him any question, but his brief warning was
enough to show me that there was some serious cause of enmity
between him and Tom's father, Carver Kinlay.

"Father," I said, "I'll not go with Tom if you object."

"Object!" said he. "What care I for the lad? It's the father that's
my enemy. His bairns may be better than he. Away to the sealing
with you, and may you get good sport!"

And he followed me to the door.



Chapter V. The Hen Harrier.


I lingered about the little quay while my father and the crew were
hoisting sail. For a moment I questioned if I should not be happier
in the bow of the Curlew, than tramping half a score of miles over
rough uninteresting moorland on the chance of capturing a seal; but
in the end I was satisfied in keeping to the plan arranged by my
companions. I waited only to see the boat bend over in the fresh
breeze as she sailed outward to the ships; then, armed with my
harpoon and a knobbed stick, I hastened out of Stromness, followed
by my dog.

Selta (so called after one of our native streams) was a
long-bodied, long-haired animal, with a touch of the otter hound in
her nature. I got her from Colin Lothian, an old "gaberlunzie" man
who travelled our countryside. He gave me the dog when she was a
young thing, and he had another of the same litter which followed
him wherever he went about the island.

Selta was notable for her shaggy brown coat and ungainly head, and
for her keen scent. One day during the previous winter I had been
over to Russadale for my mother, and in coming home I was caught in
a snowstorm. The mist was thick and the way obscured by the driving
snow, but Selta lowered her nose and led me over the hills in a
beeline to Stromness.

She had never before been out with me at the seal catching; but I
took her this day, thinking she might prove useful--as indeed she
did.

The direct way to Skaill lay along an almost straight road to the
northward, by Hamla Voe and the western shores of the loch of
Stenness, past the Druid standing stones.

On this May afternoon, as I walked along the familiar road, there
was little to attract my attention. The gray stretch of water lay
still and cold, and the ploughed fields beyond it were brown and
barren. In a more southern clime every tree and bush would be, at
that season, putting forth fresh verdure, and the budding hedgerows
would be bursting into green beauty; but to me, at that period of
my life, the sweet-smelling hawthorn, the golden-fingered laburnum,
and the full, rich blossom of an apple orchard were unknown
delights. I had never yet seen a real tree, and our highest bushes
in Pomona reached scarcely to my shoulder. The land was all gray
and barren.

At the old mill of Cairston I was joined by Robbie Rosson, and,
instead of continuing by the road, we cut across country, climbing
the stone dykes and jumping over the gurgling streams. A walk of
three miles brought us to Crua Breck, a small farmhouse on the
hillside of the same name, overlooking the Pentland Firth. The
ridge tiles of this house ran precisely north and south, and it was
a superstition amongst us that this same ridge had the power of
deciding whether the north wind should blow towards the German
Ocean or the Atlantic; just as King Eric of Orkney could, in his
time, change the direction of the winds by altering the position of
his cap.

Crua Breck was at least a mile from any other house--unless,
indeed, the ruined and tenantless cottage of Inganess merited the
name. Carver Kinlay had lived there as long as I could remember;
but the fact that the fisher folks often spoke of him as a "ferry
jumper" implied that he was still regarded as a foreigner on
Orcadian soil.

I had never been inside the Crua Breck house, nor, I may say, did I
much covet a visit there, for the inmates of the farm were not
distinguished for their friendliness or hospitality, and, with the
one exception of Thora, whom I always regarded with a sense of
kindliness, and Tom, who was my class fellow, I had little
acquaintance with the family.

Had I been more warmly inclined towards them I would have gone up
to the door at once and asked for Tom, instead of sitting on the
dyke side with Rosson and waiting till he chose to come out to us.

As we sat there, however, Thora Kinlay came past us, driving before
her a hen and her brood of chickens, which she had found straying
along the cliffs, and of her we asked for Tom. She at once offered
to run to the house and bring him, but ultimately Robbie Rosson
went instead, with my terrier at his heels.

"How is it you are not at the fishing, Halcro?" inquired Thora when
we were alone. "I saw the schoolmaster away down at the Bush just
now as I came past. He seemed to be catching very little, though."

"Ah!" I said, "I doubt it's too clear a day for the trout. We're
off to Skaill Vie to see if we can catch a seal."

"That will be fine fun," said Thora, with a touch of envy in her
voice. "I wish I was going with you. Will you not take me?"

"Indeed," I returned, not unwilling that she should join us in our
sport, "I'd be real glad if you would come. But here's Tom, we'll
ask him."

Robbie and Tom approached across a plot of potatoes. Tom was eating
a huge piece of oatcake, and slashing, with a long stick he
carried, at the heads of the thistles that grew, all too
plentifully, among the potatoes.

Tom was a tall, large-boned lad, and his feet, which were encased
in rivlins, or rough hide shoes, projected several inches below his
trousers; his arms, too, seemed to have grown far beyond the length
of his jacket sleeves. His untidy black hair and dark eyes
contrasted strangely with the fair and delicate beauty of his
sister Thora. A stranger might have taken Thora to be of pure Norse
family, and her adventurous spirit would have justified the belief.
But Tom took after his father, whose type was that of a race not
uncommon in the north of Scotland, and called--for I know not what
reason--"The dark men of Connemara."

"Tom," I asked when he was beside us, "what do you say to Thora
coming with us to the sealing?"

"What! Certainly not," replied Tom, who was ever jealous of his
sister and loved not to favour her in any way. "What would a lassie
do at the sealing? Let her go back home and do her lessons, and try
if she can win to the head of the class again."

"Indeed," said Thora with suppressed indignation, "it is you who
should try to do that, Tom. You're the eldest and biggest lad in
the school, and have never yet been at the head of the class, dunce
that you are! But away with you to the sealing. I do not care, for
I have adventure of my own. I know where there's a hen harrier
building her nest on the Black Craigs, and it's not you I will tell
where it is, my lad."

This was a successful parting shot from Thora. She well knew that
any lad in Orkney would envy her the discovery of a falcon's nest,
and that Tom, more than any other, would be jealous of her finding
what he might have searched for in vain.

"Just fancy that lass finding a harrier's nest!" he murmured as we
went along. "I wonder if it's true! I bet she only said that out of
spite because we would not let her come with us. But who wants a
slip of a girl at such work? She'd only frighten the seals and
prevent us from catching any. It's my opinion we have enough of the
girls in the school without them joining us in our sports. What do
you say, Ericson?"

"I don't know about that," I said. "For my part I shouldn't have
objected to Thora coming with us. As for the hen harrier, I don't
doubt that what she said was quite true. It's well known that she's
one of the best cliff climbers of us all."

"Tut! you always side with the lassies, Ericson. That's because
you're aye beside them at the head of the class. What was it that
old Duke gave her this morning? Was it a bawbee?"

"I took no notice of what it was, Tom," I replied. "But it was very
kind of him to give her anything."

"It was a sixpence he gave her," said Robbie Rosson. "I saw the
colour of it."

"A sixpence!" exclaimed Tom. "The sneak that she is! Let's go back
and make her give us a share of it."

"Get away, man," said Robbie. "What is it to us though the bailie
gave her a dozen sixpences? He'd have given it to any of us if we'd
been at the head of the class."

The discussion upon Thora ended here, and we continued our walk in
comparative silence.

Willie Hercus was waiting for us when we reached the hill of
Yeskenaby. Hercus was a barefooted, red-haired boy, with gray eyes
that were almost hidden in the fatness of his cheeks, and totally
so when he laughed, as he invariably did on the least provocation.
His brow and nose were covered with brown freckles, like a turkey's
egg; and he wore a large sea jacket that had belonged to his
father, one of the crew of the Curlew.

We walked leisurely along the brink of the Black Craigs--a line of
steep cliffs bordering the western portion of the Mainland. At
times a hoodie crow would fly across our path, or the red grouse be
startled from their nests in the freshly-budding heather; and sea
fowl in large numbers sailed gracefully over our heads or deep down
the cliffs, making the chasms echo with their ceaseless screaming.

We made no attempt to kill or capture any of the birds. One bird,
however, we did take, and that more by accident than intention. It
happened this way:

My dog was trotting before us, with her nose to the ground, when
suddenly she made a run through the short heather after a lapwing,
which was, or pretended to be, unable to fly. I think it was trying
to decoy the dog away from its nest. As we watched the chase, Tom
cried out:

"Look, look, there's a hawk after them!"

And, indeed, so it was. The lapwing ran with wondrous speed, and
before Selta had time to snap at it a hawk had nipped in before the
dog's nose in the attempt to rob her of her prey. Unfortunately for
the larger bird, however, the dog's snap, intended for the
fugitive, came upon the hawk's outstretched neck. The lapwing
escaped unhurt, and flew screaming into the air, but Selta held to
the hawk till we ran up and helped her. I managed to secure the
bird's wings, which flapped about with surprising strength, while
Tom held its struggling legs.

"Thraw its neck, thraw its neck!" cried Rosson, now coming up to
us.

Selta loosened her hold, and Willie Hercus took the hawk's head in
his hand, carefully guarding against its sharp beak, gave its neck
a rapid twist, and the bird was dead.

"What kind of a bird is it?" eagerly asked Kinlay, whose knowledge
of our native birds was as imperfect as his knowledge of Latin
conjugations.

"Can you not see it's a harrier--a hen harrier?" I said, as I
stretched out the large and beautiful wings of gray-blue feathers
and proceeded to bind the bird's feet with a string.

"The very same that Thora spoke of, I'll be bound!" Tom exclaimed
with satisfaction, as he evidently thought of his sister's secret
of the nest on the Black Craigs.

"What'll we do with it?" asked Hercus. "Is it good for eating?"

"Nonsense, Willie!" said I. "Surely we've birds in plenty without
eating hawks! Let's give it to the dominie."

"Ay, let's give it to the dominie," chimed in Robbie Rosson, always
ready to agree with whatever I proposed.

"The dominie! What for would you give it to the dominie?" objected
Kinlay. "It's my bird. I first saw it."

"Your bird! your bird, indeed!" exclaimed Hercus, putting his hands
in his pockets and assuming an attitude of indignant surprise. "Is
it the man who first sees the whale that has the blubber? No, no,
Ericson's dog caught the bird. Let Hal do as he likes with his
own."

I have no doubt that Tom coveted the dead falcon in order to
persuade his sister that he had discovered her harrier's nest. When
we agreed to keep the bird for the schoolmaster, he accordingly
grew gloomy, and the rest of the journey to Skaill was accomplished
without his joining in the merry talk, of which there was no lack,
you may be sure.



Chapter VI. "Better Gear Than Rats."


Skaill Vic is a large, sheltered inlet of the sea. I have heard
that in ancient times it was a meeting place of the Norse vikings,
and it is just such a place as a pirate might choose to make his
headquarters, being a convenient station from which he could ravage
the adjacent shores of Scotland, or sail over to Norway, or even
north to Iceland, and safely return to its secluded shelter, to
store his treasure in the dark caverns of the rugged cliffs. I may
here remind you that Pomona Island was, long ago, the holy land of
the Northman, and that the cairns and cromlechs scattered over our
hills and plains are to this day associated with the visits of the
old viking buccaneers. Andrew Drever, who was exceedingly well
versed in the antique lore of the Orkneys, once told us in school
of a Runic inscription he had seen in the Maes Howe at Stenness. It
was interpreted to the effect that one of the old vikings "had
found much fee in Orkhow," and that this treasure had been buried
"to the northwest."

"Happy is he," the legend continued--"Happy is he who may discover
this great wealth."

But, of course, no person had ever found trace of it, and Mr.
Drever supposed that it must have been swept away by the furious
storms that, in wintertime, dash continually against the rocky ribs
of the Orcadian coasts.

We got down by a pathway to the sloping beach, which the tide had
left bare. At the point where we hoped to find some seals, we
observed several men and women gathering seaweed, preparatory to
burning it for kelp. This was a disappointment to us, since, if
there were any seals about, it was likely they would be scared away
by the kelp burners. But we walked along under the high banks as
far as the northern extremity of the bay, in expectation of finding
some sport on the outer shores.

We sat for a long while talking, as schoolboys will talk, in a
sheltered cleft of the headland, which, I believe, had once been a
cavern, and was known by the name of the Kierfiold Helyer. Here the
force of many an Atlantic storm had so worn away the face of the
rocks that the cliff was driven back to the innermost parts of the
original cave. Great pieces of granite lay about in disorder,
showing where the roof of the cavern had fallen in; and on one of
these boulders we sat until we were weary, looking out to the
water's edge, in expectation of seeing some seals appear.

Skaill Bay was our favourite spot for the sealing, and at the
proper season the seals were generally plentiful and not timid.
Indeed, so bold were they sometimes, that on a Sabbath morning,
when the bell of Sandwick Church, hard by, had been ringing for
divine service, I have seen the animals collect in numbers on the
beach to listen to the strange sound, which held them so fixed and
charmed, that it required an effort to startle them away. Now,
however, the seals seemed to have deserted the place, and I was not
sorry when Tom Kinlay proposed that we should give up our search
for them and return home.

Just as we were moving away I chanced to look along the shoreline,
and at some distance from where we stood I detected a moving object
in the water, and presently saw what I took to be three seals
basking on a bank of sand. Now was our weariness changed to eager
desire, and we at once prepared for some good sport.

Leaving our dead falcon on a slab of rock, we quietly distributed
ourselves. Willie Hercus approached the seals under cover of a
large boulder. I crept along by the foot of the cliffs with Selta,
intending to get down to the water's edge, and so work back again
to cut off the retreat of the seals; while Kinlay and Rosson did
the same on the other side.

We gradually and silently closed round our game. Our approach was,
however, somewhat marred by an alarm given by a seagull flying over
the seals. The largest animal turned round towards the sea. Its
mates took the signal and, with it, made for the water.

I gave a word to the dog, and Selta ran forward to meet the middle
seal, which she kept at bay as she might have kept a sheep, barking
in its face and always getting between it and the water. Tom and
Robbie ran after one of the others, while the largest seal, which I
had marked as my own prize, managed to escape me and plunge into
the sea. I then turned to encounter the seal that the dog and
Willie Hercus had arrested. Willie, having no stick or harpoon, was
throwing large stones at the animal, which seemed to pay little
attention to them, but kept its large, beautiful eyes fixed upon
the dog. One of the stones, unfortunately, struck Selta, and when
she turned, the seal made its way past. I saw the movement and
succeeded in striking the seal on the nose with my knobbed stick.
The animal collapsed at once; its head dropped on the sand, and it
moved no more.

Meanwhile Robbie and Tom, who had my harpoon, were having a hard
fight. Their seal had been struck once with the harpoon on the left
shoulder. Tom tried to intercept its retreat, and just as it was
entering the water he fell down upon it with all his weight, at the
same time grasping its wounded flipper in his two hands. The seal,
though weak, drew him some way over the slippery stones and into
the sea; but Tom proved victor. Rising on his knees in the water,
he wrapped both his arms round the seal, and, with the assistance
of Rosson, succeeded in carrying it ashore, where it was finally
killed.

We had heavy work conveying our two seals up the beach to the place
where we had left our dead bird; and there with our knives we
proceeded to secure the skins and the blubber, leaving the
carcasses behind for the cormorants and carrion crows.

Willie Hercus and I were finished first, and we carefully folded up
our perfect sealskin. But Tom, who was less accustomed to the work,
fumbled away awkwardly, muttering to himself when his sharp blade
cut into the skin instead of neatly parting it from the body.

As we sat on a rock waiting for our companions, Selta went sniffing
about on her own account and rooting into the far corners of the
old cave. She at length found her way to the dead hen harrier, as
it lay on a slab of flagstone. Hercus called her off as she put her
nose too closely to the bird. But Selta was following her
instincts; for, in turning the bird with her nose, she disturbed a
small rat which was coolly making its meal there. I ran to examine
the damage done to the hawk (for I was anxious to give the bird
uninjured to Mr. Drever), while Willie followed the dog into the
crevice where she had chased the rat. I found the harrier was not
much damaged; a few feathers were bitten out and a little of the
skin was broken, that was all.

I put my harpoon and stick through the string that secured the
bird's legs and slung it over my shoulder, gathered up our
sealskin, and went to hurry up Tom and Robbie, for the tide was
rising and we had a long journey before us. Tom had just cut the
last of the skin from the seal's head, and when he had folded it
up, the three of us began our walk towards the further shore of the
bay, expecting Hercus to follow with the dog.

"Hello! what can be keeping Hercus so long?" asked Robbie, when we
had walked some distance.

I told him about the rat that the dog was after, and looked back
for Willie. Not seeing him, we concluded he had gone round by the
top of the cliffs, and we continued our way a few yards further.
Then we heard Hercus calling after us in an excited way.

"Come back, lads, come back!" he shouted; and I looked at the sea
line, fearing lest it was the rising tide that Hercus was warning
us against.

"I'm not going back," objected Tom. "We've got time to get to the
other side long before the water's up. Besides, I'm hungry. I'm
going home."

"Tut, didn't we wait for you while you skinned your seal? Let's go
back," I urged. "Maybe Hercus is hurt."

"Come away back, Tom," added Rosson.

So we all returned to where Willie Hercus still remained, and
wondered what he could mean by calling us back.

When we entered the chasm we were much surprised to find Hercus
lying flat on the shingle, with his right arm deep in a hole he had
dug, and the dog at his side, wagging her tail and uttering short
barks of excitement.

"Good sakes!" exclaimed Robbie Rosson. "What's wrong with the lad?"

Much relieved we were to hear Hercus speak. I confess I had felt
certain some harm had happened to him.

"Come away," he said, in a tone which was far from being a cry of
pain. "Come away, lads, and give us a hand here. There's better
gear than rats in this hole, I'm thinking."

And, so saying, he rose to his knees and held out to us a heavy and
black piece of metal, which at first I took to be an iron bolt.

"Well, what is it?" I asked, taking the thing in my hand and
examining it.

"What is it?" said Hercus. "Can you not see, lad? Why, it's
silver!"



Chapter VII. What The Shingle Revealed.


Now the explanation of Willie's curious discovery, as we afterwards
fully learned, was this: When I took up the dead falcon, Hercus,
intent upon witnessing Selta's skill at ratting, stood beside the
dog as she scraped with her forefeet the shingle from the crevice
through which the rat had escaped. Disappointed at losing her
prize, the terrier dug and dug away at the shingle and moist sand,
scattering it behind her, and burying her nose deep down. Then a
strange, grim object was unearthed. In the midst of the stones,
Hercus, to his horror, saw lying there a ghastly human skull, with
the great cavities where the eyes had been, staring at him.
Hesitating at the sight of this frightful spectacle, he at last
mustered courage to take the thing in his hand. He was in the act
of examining it, when, from one of the hollow eye sockets, out
jumped the fugitive rat. Had the jaws of the skull moved in speech,
Willie could not have been more terrified than he was by seeing the
rat spring from its strange hiding place.

Dropping the horrible thing upon the rock at his feet, where the
rotten bone broke into fragments, he rushed out upon the beach and
called us back. Attracted to the spot again, he watched the dog
burrowing in the shingle. Amongst the stones and sand he saw the
dull sheen of what he at first supposed was a curious seashell, but
which, when he picked up and examined it, he found to be an old
coin. Believing that there might be more of these buried in the
sand, he went down upon his knees once more to search. He had just
discovered the bar of metal when we returned.

"What is it?" he said. "Why, it's silver?"

We each in turn handled the little bar, and expressed our opinion
regarding what Hercus supposed it to be. It was heavy enough,
certainly, to be silver; but the improbability of such a piece of
the precious metal being left there presented itself, and none of
us was quite satisfied until Hercus, taking out his knife, cut and
scraped the surface of the ingot and revealed the shining white
metal underlying the grit and tarnish that had gathered upon it
during the years--perhaps the centuries--it had lain there
undisturbed.

By our united efforts we enlarged the hole that Willie and the dog
had made, digging with the harpoon and removing with our hands the
loosened stones. We found a quantity of antique coins of various
sizes, which, by reason of their lightness, I suppose, were much
scattered about. Then deeper down below these we came upon a number
of large rings, or bracelets, in the form of horseshoes, and
several ingots of silver, similar to the one Hercus had first
found.

We grew excited in our search; and as the quantity of treasure we
unearthed increased, so did we increase our exertions, until there
was quite a heap of silver gathered upon the slab of flagstone
where we placed it.

At a spot near where Hercus had discovered the skull we found a
curious garment, formed of a fine network of rings and chains. It
was much broken and torn--though the shoulder bands were preserved,
as well as the collar--and we could see that the owner, whoever he
might have been, must have had a large and strong body, for the
coat was of great weight. Beside it there were what we took to be
the remains of a helmet, the ornaments upon which were of a yellow
and still untarnished metal, with a large crimson stone set in the
front.

Hercus pronounced the metal to be brass; but I never discovered
truly what it was, as I did not handle the fragments again, for the
reason that (as I happened to notice at the time) Tom Kinlay, who
kept silence regarding them, quietly put them in his pocket,
allowing us afterwards to suppose that we had left them behind us.
I had my suspicions, however, that the ornaments were of pure gold.

In addition to the coat of mail and the helmet, there were three
other objects that engaged our special regard. These were a broken
belt--made of link rings of bronze--the head of a battle axe, and a
long sword. The sword, which was in a scabbard embossed with fine
ornaments, had a richly-figured handle. It was a heavy weapon, and
none of us could draw it from its scabbard, for the rust that
encrusted it.

When all that it seemed possible to find had been collected, and
our digging brought nothing more to light, we opened our two seals'
skins--throwing away the blubber, which seemed of little worth to
us now that we had possessed ourselves of all this wealth--and
lifting the treasure into them we made them into slings, one of
which was carried by Tom Kinlay and Willie Hercus, the other by
Robbie Rosson and myself. We bore our burdens joyfully as far as
the other side of Skaill Bay, just managing to escape the tide that
was creeping up to the base of the cliffs.

The last rays of the sun were setting across the broad Atlantic
when we reached the top of the headland, and in the gray twilight
spreading over the sea we watched the fleet of whaling ships
sailing to the westward.



Chapter VIII. Dividing The Spoil.


Resting after the work of carrying our burden up the cliffs, we
stood for a space upon the heights above Row Head to watch the
sails of the fleet growing smaller as they approached the distant
line of the horizon. The leaden sea danced in the fresh breeze, and
the sky gradually lost its golden tints and assumed the clear, cold
hue of the northern twilight. To the southward, across the moor,
rose the dark mountains of Hoy Island, with the moon gleaming pale
above them. From the shore came the fresh smell of the seaweed and
the plaintive crying of the gulls.

The evening was growing late, and there were still half a dozen
miles of rough moorland between Ramna and Stromness. Over the braes
of Borwick we travelled at a steady pace. We were light of heart,
for we had had a successful expedition, as was proved not only by
our dead falcon and the two seals' skins, but, more than all, by
the great wealth that those seals' skins carried.

Many were our conjectures as to the meaning of that great horde of
silver we had discovered hidden in the sands of Skaill Bay.

"I wonder how it all came there!" mused Robbie, and then he added,
"D'ye ken what I think, lads?"

"What think you, then, Robbie?" I asked.

"Well," said he, "I just think it must have been cast there by some
shipwreck in the olden time. D'ye mind, Hal, of the story of the
wreck of yon Spanish ship on the Carrig-na-Spana?"

"What! the San Miguel?"

"Ay, maybe that was her name, I dinna ken. Well, if you mind, she
struck on the reef there, and the skipper dropped all his treasure
chests overboard, in mortal fear that the Orkney wreckers would rob
him of them. I suppose he took his bearings, but for many a day the
wreckers searched the waters, and never a thing did they find.
Well, years and years after that the old skipper's son came to
Orkney, and went straight to the spot where the treasure had been
sunk and carried it all off to Spain."

"But that explains nothing, Robbie," I argued. "However, we ken
well enough that those Spanish ships were aye loaded with gold and
precious stones. And then, d'ye not mind of hearing about the
Spanish Armada ships that were wrecked on the Orkneys? Now, I
wouldn't be surprised though the gear we have gotten was nothing
else than the wreckage of an Armada ship. Even the skull that
Willie found, maybe belonged to one of the soldier chaps that came
to fight the English. But what is your opinion, Willie? You should
know, for it was you who found the treasure."

"Well, Ericson," said he wisely, "I just think it was most
extraordinary to see the heaps of siller come out of the very sands
of the seashore, and in such a desolate place; and beyond that, it
was a most providential thing that the dog ran after yon wee rat.
What most gets over me, though, is to think of the rat making its
nest in the dead man's skull. Man! what a fright I had when the
beast jumped out! As for how the siller came there, I canna just
say; but, you mind, the dominie told us in the school that, lang
syne, some of those viking lads used to cruise hereabout. Now, I'm
thinking that it's just possible one of them had maybe left the
siller for safety in the Kierfiold Cave where I--where we found it,
and clean forgotten to go back for it; just as old Betsy Matthew
forgot the guineas she hid under the floor in the heel of a
stocking."

"Ay, I dinna doubt it may be so, Willie," observed Rosson. "But
then, what about the dead man's head?"

"'Deed I canna say what way that could be there. I'm thinking we
must e'en refer it to the dominie. He kens all about these things,"
said Hercus; and then he turned to Kinlay, who hitherto had
expressed no conjecture.

"But what think you of it all, Tom?"

"What do I think!" said Kinlay in a tone of indifference. "I care
not what way the silver came there. What does it matter? I'm only
thinking what I'll do with my own share of it."

Now I confess that I had not before thought anything at all about
what we should do with the silver. I was so much interested in the
circumstance of our curious discovery of the hidden treasure that
the thought of its market value, or of our means of disposing of
it, had never entered my head; and I believe Hercus and Rosson were
totally ignorant of the fact that our find was really worth more
than the mere interest we naturally attached to the articles as
curious antiquities. Had I been asked as to the disposal of them, I
believe I would have proposed that the whole treasure should be
handed over to the care of our schoolmaster, who would doubtless
see that we did not lose by any sale he might effect.

Tom Kinlay was the first to suggest the sharing of the silver
pieces. We could offer no reasonable objection to a plan which
seemed so fair to all of us, and we agreed that before we parted an
equal division should be made.

Walking along a stretch of bleak moorland bordering the sea, taking
always the nearest cuts across the jutting points of rocky
headland, we at length approached the quaint graveyard of Bigging.
The night was clear, and light almost as day; but Robbie and Willie
would, I believe, rather have gone many miles out of our direct way
than go near that awesome place.

The ruined chapel and the long, flat tombstones surrounding it,
seemed to have an eerie influence upon our imagination, and we
could but whistle some merry tune to keep up our hearts. Willie
Hercus, though naturally daring, was now especially timid, the
remembrance of that skull he had handled having taken such hold of
his mind that the simple mention of it by one of us was enough to
make his voice sink to a trembling whisper, as though he feared the
dead man might come to life again and appear in our midst to accuse
us of having disturbed his bones.

I think Tom Kinlay was the only one of us who did not look with
superstitious awe into the dark shadows that hung about those
ruined walls and silent tombstones; but he was so tall and strong
that nothing seemed to daunt him, and soon he made a proposal that
went far towards assuring me that he was absolutely fearless.

"Now, lads," said he, when we were passing the low wall of the
burying ground, "let us get in here and spread out our things on
one of those flat stones, and then we can share them out. Come
along; nobody can disturb us in that quiet burying ground."

"What!" exclaimed Robbie, betraying his terror at the proposal.
"Over there among the graves! Not I. I'm not going into such a
place after the sun has gone down. Why, we canna be sure that the
ghosts of the dead will not spring out upon us!"

"No, I'm not going in there either," chimed in Hercus. "We can
divide the siller here on the moor just as well as in that fearsome
place. Come back, Hal, dinna you gang either."

"Well, well, what a pack of frightened bairns ye are!" said Kinlay,
preparing to enter by the open gate. "Come along. What on earth can
ye be feared at?"

Thus taunted for want of courage, Willie and Robbie overcame their
superstitious scruples, and we all four made our way in among the
graves.

We spread our treasures upon the top of a flat tombstone that was
somewhat higher than its neighbours and formed a convenient table
for our purpose. The stone was overgrown with lichens and moss, and
skirted by a growth of nettles and thistles. As we stood around it
in the twilight, surrounded by a wild solitude, we might have been
mistaken for a company of pirates dividing their ill-gotten gains.

Whilst Kinlay and Hercus were opening out the two seals' skins my
eyes idly wandered over the surface of the tombstone, and were
arrested by the inscription carved thereon. There was an epitaph in
some foreign language, old and worn, but under this was a name that
seemed to be newly cut. It was the name "Thora Quendale."

Now the name Thora is not a common one in Orkney, and seeing it on
that strange old tombstone naturally made me think of the Thora
whom I knew--Tom Kinlay's sister.

"Tom, did you ever notice the name on this grave? It's some woman
buried here named Thora."

He turned and read the inscription.

"Ay, I've seen it before. It's some woman that was found drowned at
the foot of the Black Craigs, years ago. I dinna ken who she was. I
think she was in a shipwreck."

"Oh! Then it was no relation of yours?"

"No. That is, I dinna think it. But I have heard that Thora was
named after her."

I asked him to tell me about the wreck; but just then Willie Hercus
interrupted, saying:

"Come along, Ericson; you had better be the one to divide the
treasure for us. We all ken you'll divide it fairly."

The treasure was heaped upon the tombstone, and as I regarded it I
foresaw the difficulty of the task before me; for the pieces were
obviously of very varied values, and I did not see how I could
easily distribute them into four equal shares. But I made the
attempt according to the manner that I had seen adopted by the
fishermen at Stromness in dividing their fish.

To begin with, there was the sword--apparently the most valuable of
all the treasures. Who was to have this? I naturally thought it
should go to Hercus, to whom we owed our possession of the wealth,
and I remembered that Kinlay already had an equivalent share in the
pieces of broken helmet he had appropriated. I handed the sword
over to Hercus, therefore. Tom offered no opposition at the time,
but he afterwards bartered with Hercus for it, giving him in
exchange two of the ingots of silver and the coat of mail which
subsequently fell to his share.

The sword and the coat of mail being apportioned to Hercus and
Kinlay, I then gave the bronze belt to Rosson, and took for myself
some pieces of armour and a fragment of a shield. Then there were
twenty-two ingots, or bars of silver, each of about six ounces in
weight. Five of these were apportioned to each of us, two being
left to be dealt with afterwards.

Next, there were thirteen brooches, such as the Scandinavians--as I
learned later on--were accustomed to use for binding their mantles.
They were all of similar pattern, and would weigh, perhaps, three
ounces each. Of them we had three apiece. There were three massive
torques, or rings, something in the form of horseshoes, the opening
being left to admit of their being fastened upon the neck, where
the ornaments were worn, I believe, by the ancients as symbols of
rank or command. These articles were composed of a series of rings
interlaced, some of them being embossed with rude but curious
designs.

I saw that we could not each of us have one of these, and here I
was again in a difficulty; but since the ingots of silver were of
about an equal weight, I took one of them myself and gave an
ornament to each of my companions. Hercus, however, would not agree
to this, and he showed, truly enough, that the ingots were worth no
more than their weight in metal; whereas the rings were of much
greater value, on account of being curious specimens of ancient
art. He therefore asked me to take a few of the coins in order to
make a fair division. The remaining coins, of which there was a
considerable quantity, were then counted and equally shared amongst
us.

We had now left one ingot of silver, one brooch, some odd fragments
of silver, and a small black stone which had a metal ring round it;
and the sharing of these cost more trouble than all the other
articles together. They were all, so far as we could judge, of
unequal values. The stone was considered worthless, except for the
little band of metal with which it was clasped. The brooch was only
about half the weight of the ingot, and it was not counted
precious, because already each of us had three like it, while the
small pile of silver fragments was not worth half the ingot
{i}. I thought I was acting very fairly when I suggested that
Hercus should have what remained, because, I said, if it had not
been for him we would have had nothing at all.

"'Deed you'll do nothing of the kind," objected Kinlay. "What for
should Hercus take all?"

"Well, well," I said, somewhat ruffled, I admit, at Tom's greed,
"you needn't be so sulky. Take you and divide the things. You'll
not do it any fairer."

But Tom saw a way of sharing the things which suited himself, if it
did not quite agree with my own views of fairness. To Willie he
gave the brooch, to Robbie he passed the pile of fragments; and now
he held the two remaining pieces, the ingot of silver and the
little black stone. We awaited with much interest his final
decision. With an unpleasant flash of his dark eyes he cast the
stone to my end of the rude table, and quietly thrust the bar of
silver with his other possessions into his capacious pockets.

I tried hard to check the words that rose to my lips. Throughout
the afternoon I had noticed Tom's pointed objections to many things
I had done or had proposed to do. He had objected to Thora
accompanying us on the sealing expedition. He had disagreed with
the disposal of the dead hen harrier; other little incidents, most
of which had testified to his deep-rooted selfishness, I had not
failed to notice. More than all, I remembered how he had pocketed
the jewelled fragments of the helmet, and kept the knowledge of
their value from us all. As for the opinions of the other two lads
regarding him, it was Willie Hercus who had called him a "sneak" in
school that morning, and Robbie Rosson, I knew, had certainly no
love for Tom, who had persistently bullied him.

"Well, are you not satisfied?" said Kinlay, seeing my undisguised
indignation.

"Yes, with my own share," I replied. "But if you'd taken the
smaller piece of siller for yourself, and given Willie Hercus yon
piece you've taken, I'd have thought you more honourable."

And then I roundly accused him of having stolen the fragments of
the helmet.

"You have stolen the things," I said. "You saw that they were of
more worth than the rest, and you were afraid that we would want a
share of them."

"You're a liar!" he exclaimed angrily.

"And you're a thief!" I retorted; and I walked round to him,
determined, if necessary, to defend my accusation in a more
practical way than by empty words.

Now, I am confident that Kinlay was almost eager for such a chance
as this to pay back many debts which his own jealousy had from time
to time conjured up against me. For, apart from the fact that I
happened to be a little more brilliant than he in our class at
school, there were not wanting indications that he was in other
ways losing ground in our common race, and circumstances seemed to
require that we should each make a final effort now for the upper
hand.

Seeing my determined attitude, he regarded it as a challenge, and
at once took off his jacket and held it out for Robbie Rosson to
take charge of. Robbie promptly showed the tenor of his feelings by
allowing the jacket to fall upon one of the gravestones, and by
coming to my side. Hercus merely busied himself in pacifying my
dog, which had become restless on hearing our high words.

Kinlay and I now stood face to face, and I almost trembled to think
of the thrashing that was probably in store for me. He gave the
first blow, which struck me soundly on the side of the head and
knocked my cap off. I buttoned my jacket tight and closed with my
adversary, yet with small success. The fight was for a few moments
unequal. Tom was much the taller, and his big feet, with their hide
sandals, seemed to grip the elastic turf. His fists, too, were
large and hard, and his lunging strokes were enough to stagger one
of our native ponies.

Against this superiority I had to depend upon such power of limb
and endurance as I had acquired by long practice at cliff climbing
and in swimming the strong currents of Scapa Flow. For a time a
heavy blow on my chest disabled me, and my right arm was sorely
bruised by the many blows it had suffered in guarding my face.
Still, I was determined not to give in; and, just as one gets a
second wind in swimming, so did I now feel a new and strange
strength come upon me. I continued the conflict with renewed
energy.

Stepping backward upon one of the flat tombstones, I once more
stood ready to receive my opponent. He struck without effect at my
face, and while he was recovering his balance I saw my opportunity,
and hit him a strong blow between the eyes. He staggered and fell,
and I saw that the fight was over. Rising to his feet he did not
retaliate, but picked up his jacket, wrapped his store of the
treasure into his seal's skin, and wiping the dripping blood from
his nose, walked away across the heath in the direction of Crua
Breck, muttering a vow of vengeance.

The combat had been sharp and effectual; but it was the outburst of
an antagonism which had long been gathering strength; it was the
practical declaration of an enmity that grew and lasted for many a
day.



Chapter IX. Captain Gordon.


I was oppressed with a weight of weariness by the time that I came
within sight of Stromness. After leaving Hercus and Rosson over at
Yeskenaby, I met not a person until I reached the shores of Hamla
Voe. Here, however, on turning from the moorland path into the main
road, I saw a stranger resting upon the low wall at the roadside.
He was evidently admiring the scene presented by the quiet bay of
Stromness.

A barque lay at anchor in the harbour, her tall, tapering masts and
taut ropes clearly defined against the gray sky. Beyond the bright
beacon light of the Ness, the sloping island of Graemsay could
barely be distinguished from the deep purple mountains of Hoy, and
along the line of the bay stood the gabled houses of the town,
their dimly-lighted windows reflected on the water.

As I approached the stranger, I saw that he was a seafarer.

"Fine night, sir," I said in salutation as I passed him.

"Ay, very fine. What way is the wind, my lad?"

"Sou'-sou'-west," I replied, looking up at a few flecks of white
cloud in the clear sky.

"Are you going on to Stromness? If so, I will walk along with you.
That's a fine bird you're carrying. What do you call it?"

"A hen harrier, sir. My dog caught it over on the moor. Is that
your barque lying in the bay, sir, the Lydia?"

"Ay; she's a rakish craft, isn't she? We're sailing again in the
morning for South America. Do you think we shall have a fair wind,
my lad?"

"Yes, if it does not veer round too much to the westward."

"You appear to have studied the weather," he said.

"Yes," I answered. "In Stromness we all notice the wind, and father
has taught me to know all the signs of the weather."

"Then your father is a fisherman, I suppose?" he remarked, as he
turned to walk down the brae with me.

"Father's a pilot," I said. "I'm Sandy Ericson's lad."

"Ericson! Ah! I know Ericson. He's a splendid fellow, a regular
Norseman, in fact."

And then he proceeded to praise my father as I had so often before
heard him praised, and with all of which I did not venture to
disagree.

He spoke with me until we reached the entrance to the town, where I
noticed Andrew Drever, my schoolmaster, walking in advance of us,
carrying his rod under his arm and a string of fish in his hand.

"Good evening, sir!" I said, as we overtook him.

"Hello, Halcro, my lad!" he exclaimed, as cheerily as though he had
not seen me for weeks.

"Good evening!" said my sailor companion to the dominie. "I see you
have some fine trout there."

"Yes," said Andrew, when he had returned the greeting. "They're not
so bad, and I've had some fine sport with them. Are you coming from
Kirkwall?"

"No," replied the sailor. "I was just up the hill there for a
saunter in the gloaming. The gloaming lasts very long here, I
notice. What time is it dark in midsummer?"

"In midsummer?" replied Andrew. "Well, it's seldom darker than
this; and on the twenty-first of June you can see the sun even at
midnight from the top of the Ward Hill yonder. You'll belong to one
of the ships here, no doubt, sir?"

"Yes, that barque out there with the tall masts."

"Ay, she came in today. That will be the Lydia, I'm thinking, and
you will be Captain Gordon? Bailie Duke was telling me you were in
the port. And when do you sail?"

"Tomorrow," said the captain. "We're bound for Brazil; but I was
wanting to see some people tonight. Pilot Ericson asked me to smoke
a pipe with him. Then I have to see Grace Drever, to--"

"Grace Drever!" exclaimed the dominie, evidently wondering what the
sailor could want to see his mother for.

"Yes," continued Captain Gordon. "My ship's overrun with mice, and
I was directed to Grace Drever, who, I am told, deals in all the
charms and cantrips a sailor can require."

"Charms and cantrips!" echoed the schoolmaster. "Why, who on earth
has been putting such notions into your head? I doubt if you go to
Grace Drever on such an errand you'll be disappointed, sir."

"You know the old lady, then?" said the captain.

"Just as well as a man can know his own mother," replied Andrew.

"Oh! then, you'll be the schoolmaster? Really, I beg your pardon;
but I was told that Mistress Drever had dealings with such things;
and although I am not exactly superstitious--"

"Never mind, sir, never mind. It's just some ignorant lads have
been making up the story; and it's all one to me, for I know well
it's not true. There was once a woman in Stromness, I will allow,
who used to sell favourable winds to the sailors. But though there
is still a most lamentable amount of superstition in the Orkney
folk--belief in witches and warlocks and such nonsense--it's
gradually, just gradually, dying away."

"No doubt the influence of your schools," observed the captain,
anxious to conciliate.

"Ay, no doubt," said Andrew. "But what was it you were saying about
mice?"

"Why, we're just infested with them, and I must get either cats or
poison for them, or I'll not say but we may be manned by mice
instead of men before we get beyond Cape Wrath."

"My mother has a cat," quietly remarked Andrew, "one of the few we
have in Orkney. And though she does not deal in witchery, you might
bring her to part with Baudrons. Now, if you'll come home with me
and have a taste of these trout--"

"Oh, thanks, thanks, most happy!" said the captain.

Now this, I thought, was a very graceful invitation for Andrew
Drever to give to a stranger who had only a few moments before
implied that his mother was a witch. But it was a kindness such as
he was ever showing; and I must add that Captain Gordon was one of
those easy-mannered sailors who at once give an agreeable
impression. I myself liked him from the very first, and I had
afterwards many reasons for rejoicing in the friendship thus
casually made.

"I have something here for you, sir," I said to the schoolmaster,
holding up the dead falcon that I carried.

"Oh! come along with us, too, Halcro. Send your dog home, and come
and take some supper with me."

I assented, and continued walking by his side as he talked with the
captain.

We had now entered the street of Stromness. It was a narrow passage
which one might span with arms outstretched, and paved without a
causeway--for it was built when there were no vehicles in
Orkney--and crooked as the inside of a whelk shell, suggesting
starlight smuggling and romantic meetings. In the windows and
obscure corners of the passages dim lamps peeped forth in the
darkness, and the flickering firelight in the houses fell upon the
stones through the open doorways, whereat sailors stood smoking
their pipes and gossiping women talked.

We turned up a little lane that led to the schoolhouse, and my dog
trotted home without me, to let my mother know I was near.



Chapter X. The Dominie Explains.


We found Grace Drever preparing the peat fire for frying the fish.
The good old woman did not hear us enter, but Andrew was a punctual
man, and it was with no show of surprise that his mother at length
recognized his presence.

Grace Drever was an active woman, somewhat bent with age, but with
no signs of decaying faculties, save in the case of her extreme
deafness. Her hair was still black, and her eyesight was quick. Her
memory for local events was as good as an almanac to the people of
Stromness, and there was something strangely uncanny about her
nature that was itself almost an excuse to those who hinted that
she had dealings with the underworld. She was one of the older
style of inhabitants, who retained the primitive habits and customs
of the island, whose spoken language had in it a mixture of the
Norse, which distinguished it from the simpler Scotch dialect
familiarly used by us of the younger generation, and yet more from
the purer English into which we were drilled at school.

Andrew Drever generally spoke good English in the presence of
strangers, though he lapsed into the broad native speech in
friendly talk with the fisher folk.

"I hae brought Captain Gordon wi' me to hae a taste o' the trout,"
he said to his mother as we entered the room, where she bent over
the fire.

"Gordon! Gordon! I dinna ken ony Gordon. What's the name o' his
ship?"

"He belongs to the Lydia, the barque that cam' in this forenoon."

"Aw, yes, I ken his ship, but I dinna ken the captain. Yes, yes,
he'll get a taste o' the troot, I warrant him that."

Then turning to Mr. Gordon, she continued: "Ye were never in
Stromness afore, captain? No? Ye maun speak loud--it's terrible
dull o' hearing I am."

The captain looked at Grace as she applied a strange, shell-like
horn to her right ear, and went closer to him.

"The Lydia has a great many mice on board," said the captain.

"Ay, you'll be takin' it out to America for the black folk, no
doubt. It's terrible hot in America, they say. But where got you
the ice? Not from Leith?"

"He didna say ice," interposed Andrew. "The captain says his ship's
full o' mice."

"Ah, mice! What for does he not get a cat?"

"It's your own cat he was wanting to get," said Andrew.

"My cat! my Baudrons! Troth, I dinna think I could part with
Baudrons. I'm terrible fond of Baudrons. Was there not a cat in
Stromness forbye mine?"

Grace said this as she selected some of the largest trout and took
them away to clean.

As I sat on a chair near the door, weary after my long tramp with
the heavy burden of silver and the dead hawk, and somewhat bruised
by my fight, Mr. Drever and the captain engaged in a long
conversation relating to the Orkneys. But during an interval of
their talk I ventured to draw the schoolmaster's attention to the
dead bird that I had brought for him.

"We caught this bird over on the moor the day, sir," I said, "and I
brought it, thinking ye'd like to put it in one o' your glass
cases."

"Man, Halcro, but that's a bonny specimen! A harrier, a hen
harrier, I declare! 'Deed but it will be a right fine addition to
our collection. And what way did ye kill it, d'ye say? Not wi' a
gun, surely?"

"No; it was flying after a peewit, and the dog caught it. Willie
Hercus thrawed its neck."

"Well, well, that's most amazing. How I wish I'd been with you. I'd
rather hae caught a harrier than a hundred sea trout."

"Did ye get some good fishing at the Bush, sir?" I asked, changing
the subject.

"Oh, ay, very good, very good; thanks to those hooks o' yours,
Halcro. I left a dozen trout wi' Jack Paterson's wife, and a dozen
wi' Mary Firth, and these I brought home. That's no sae bad, is
it?"

Then, when he had satisfied his admiration of the dead hawk, he
took us into the schoolroom, to show the captain his cases of
stuffed birds and animals. Already he had determined that he would
mount the hawk in the attitude of swooping down upon a lapwing.

It turned out that Captain Gordon was interested in birds, and knew
a good deal about their habits. I remember he told us of a swallow
which had once flown on board his ship when they were over a
thousand miles from any land, and of how the bird, exhausted by its
long flight, allowed him to hold it in his hand and feed it with
small insects taken from the decayed timbers of the ship.

When we were seated at the table over our meal of fried trout, I
had to relate my experiences of the afternoon, which I did from
beginning to end, omitting only the circumstance of my fight with
Kinlay. I did not wish to say anything against a schoolmate, and an
account of the fight would have involved unpleasant explanations.
The two men listened with attention to my account of the sealing;
but they were incredulous when I told them about finding the hidden
silver. When the table was cleared, however, and I spread out the
contents of the seal's skin, Grace and they gathered round in
astonishment and eagerly examined the curiosities by the light of
the hanging lamp and the flaming peats.

Captain Gordon weighed the bars of silver in an imaginary balance
in his hand, and gave his opinion as to their weight. The neck
rings and brooches also engaged his attention; but Andrew Drever
found greater interest in the ancient coins, which he carefully
examined, endeavouring to decipher the rough inscriptions upon
them. Most of the coins were foreign, but there were two which he
recognized as English--a Peter's penny of the tenth century, and an
older coin, which he told me was nearly a thousand years old,
bearing the name Aethelstan Rex. I cannot describe his delight in
looking over these little pieces of silver, or his satisfaction
when I offered to let him take charge of them until we determined
what should be done with the collection.

When the interest in my treasures had somewhat abated, Mr. Drever
and the captain exchanged conjectures concerning the probable
origin of what we had discovered at Skaill Bay. They could come to
no issue by all their arguments, until I chanced to mention once
more the incident of the rat and its curious hiding place in the
skull.

"A skull! a human skull!" exclaimed the dominie. "Why, that
explains it all. I can see it now. I can see it clearly!"

"See what clearly?" inquired the captain.

"This," said Andrew with a tone of conviction, "that what the lads
have discovered is nothing less than the grave of Kierfiold
Haffling, the great viking of Orkney."

Then turning to the captain he continued: "You see, Captain Gordon,
it was the custom of the old sea kings to bury their dead heroes in
caves on the seashore, or to place the body in a boat and send it
drifting to sea on its long voyage. In either case it was usual to
dress the hero in full battle array, with helmet, sword, and
shield, to enable him to fight his way to Valhalla. These relics
here of Ericson's, and those that the other lads have gotten, are
just such things as would be buried in a viking's grave. The human
skull in their midst puts the matter beyond a doubt."

"Curious, very curious!" murmured Captain Gordon. "But, sir, how do
you identify this supposed grave with that of the particular
warrior you have mentioned?"

"Kierfiold Haffling? Oh, well, you see, captain, I may be making a
mistake; but, as it happens, I have seen a runic inscription over
at Stenness which expressly states that the Jarl Haffling was
buried with his earthly treasures to the northwest of the Maes
Howe. Now, the Bay of Skaill, where the lads made the discovery, is
exactly northwest of Stenness. The one thing that surprises me is
that the treasure was not found long since, for the inscription has
clearly indicated its position, and has further stated that 'happy
is he who discovers this great wealth.' It seems to me, however,
that no person ever thought of searching within the tide line."

"But, after all," said the captain, "the wealth does not seem so
enormous. Why, I would hesitate to offer a ten-pound note for the
whole lot."

"No, it is not indeed enormous, in a worldly sense, I admit. But
you must consider the importance of the discovery from what I may
call an archaeological point of view. You see the relics have a
historical value, Mr. Gordon."

The schoolmaster then turned to me and said:

"I think, Halcro, it's a pity that you lads didn't keep these
things all together, and bring them here as ye found them. What for
did ye divide them, as though they were so many blackberries? Ye
couldn't do anything with them--ye can't sell the things."

"It was Tom Kinlay said he thought we should share them, sir. I
didn't think we were doing wrong."

"Tom Kinlay kens nothing about such matters, Halcro. Just you get
the three other lads to bring each his share to me. I will look
after it and see that ye dinna lose anything. You see, although ye
found the treasure, you lads, it doesn't rightly belong to you. No
doubt ye'll be rewarded in some way for your find; but I must tell
you that the law will not let you keep it to yoursels. A person
finding treasure of this sort can have only a third part of its
value. Is that not so, Mr. Gordon?"

"Yes," said the captain, "I fancy you're right, Mr. Drever. Of
course you refer to the law of treasure trove?"

"Exactly," agreed the master. Then turning to me, he continued:

"You see, Halcro, the Crown will claim a share of it, and the laird
gets another part. So ye'd better let the other lads ken about
this. Let them understand that they are breaking the law if they
keep their discovery a secret."

"Yes, sir, I'll tell Rosson and Hercus before school time in the
morning."

"And Kinlay?" said Mr. Drever, looking questioningly in my face.

"Maybe you'd better speak to him yoursel, sir," I returned, almost
afraid to say that my companionship with Tom was at an end.

"Hello! what's in the wind in that quarter? A quarrel, eh? I have
noticed that scratch on your cheek. Has that anything to do with
Kinlay?"

I put my hand to my cheek and found that there was blood there. I
had received a scratch that I was before unconscious of.

"Well, sir," I said, "Kinlay and I did have a bit of a fight over
at Bigging. There was a dispute over the sharing of the treasure."

And then I thought of the small black stone that Tom had given me
as an equivalent of the bar of silver he had appropriated for
himself. It was not amongst the articles I had shown to the
schoolmaster and the captain. I thought that I had perhaps left it
lying on the gravestone; but searching my pockets, I at last found
it in one of them, where I had carelessly thrust it when the fight
began. I placed it on the table before Captain Gordon, who examined
it curiously.

"What d'you make of this, sir?" asked he, turning to the dominie.
"The stone, if it is a stone at all, looks worthless; and yet I see
this ring round it is the only piece of metal that is neither
silver nor bronze, but gold."

"Gold!" I exclaimed, bending over to look at it.

"Yes, gold undoubtedly," said the captain.

Grace Drever, who had said little during the examination of the
store of silver coins and ingots beyond asking questions as to the
manner of our finding it, and giving utterance to such ejaculations
as "Losh me!" and "Saw ever onybody the likes o' that?" now took
the black stone in her hand, and having pondered over it for a
while, said, holding up her finger to me:

"Laddie, take care of this peerie {ii} thing. It will be of
more worth to thee than all the other gear together."

I did not quite understand. The gold ring, I thought, could not
surely be worth more than that heap of silver. And yet Grace was so
serious in what she said that I could scarcely doubt her word.

I was about to ask her for an explanation when we were interrupted
by the lifting of the latch of the door, and a rush of cold air
made the lamp light flicker.



Chapter XI. My Sister Jessie.


We all turned to the door to see the cause of this interruption. It
was my sister Jessie who entered, and paused on the threshold as
she observed the presence of a stranger. She wore no covering on
her head, and her brown hair fell in natural curls on her shoulders
and about her neck.

Captain Gordon rose politely and stood with his hands clasping the
back of his chair. Jessie raised her large dark eyes towards him
for a moment and looked confused.

I think this was the first time in my life that I felt conscious
that my sister was more beautiful than any other Orkney girl I
knew, with the one exception of Thora Kinlay. She was at that time
nineteen years of age; she was tall and graceful, and very easy in
her movements. It is true she had no accomplishments, such as those
of Bailie Duke's daughters; but her education in Mr. Drever's
school had been sound, and she could keep house as well as any
fisherman's wife in Orkney, and row a boat as well as any lad.

"Was it Halcro ye were seeking, Jessie?" asked old Grace, as though
my sister's presence there was a matter of as little concern to her
as the presence of the old German clock in the corner of the room.

"Yea," said Jessie. "His dog came home without him, and we were
feared he had gone ower the cliffs, or that some other mischance
had happened him.

"Where have ye been, Halcro, so late as ye are? You should have
been in your bed lang syne."

As I went to the nail for my cap, the dominie introduced Captain
Gordon to Jessie. She greeted the sailor without ceremony--for in
Orkney we are not demonstrative in this particular. But the officer
held out his hand, and she took it with evident confusion. I think
she could not have failed to notice the difference between this
handsome young man and the gray-haired, toddy-drinking captains who
usually came into Stromness and hung about our home in the Anchor
Close.

Captain Gordon did not sit down again. Perhaps the mention of the
name Ericson reminded him of his appointment with my father. But he
had not yet effected his purpose of securing Grace Drever's cat,
and he turned to the old woman, asking her again if she would part
with Baudrons.

Grace, I do not doubt, had been impressed by the open-hearted
bearing of the captain, and I had noticed his kindly way of
addressing her, so that she might hear him without effort. But she
looked fondly at her cat as he sat before the crimson fire, licking
his lips after the fish bones he had eaten. Few mice or rats came
in his way, but--luck for Baudrons--there was an abundance of fish,
and the wild birds that Andrew brought home supplied him with many
a stolen banquet.

There was one ruling passion in Baudrons, and that was his desire
to gain possession of the noisy jackdaw which so often disturbed
him with its steady shining eyes as they looked down at him from
behind the wicker bars of the cage. I believe Baudrons anticipated
the death of Peter as the crowning achievement of his life; and had
he been consulted in the matter of the Lydia he might have shown
some reluctance to enter the community of mice before he had
compassed the jackdaw's death.

Grace was finally prevailed upon--much to the satisfaction of the
dominie--to give up her cat; and it was arranged that I should take
Baudrons out to the ship before school time on the following
morning.

I was preparing to leave with Jessie and Captain Gordon, when Mrs.
Drever called me to her near the fire.

"Come here, Halcro, laddie. Tak the peerie stone, see, and have a
care that ye dinna lose it;" and she handed to me the little black
stone.

Mr. Drever was standing beside her, and I looked to him to ask if I
should take possession of this much of the viking's treasure.

"Take it, take it, Halcro," he said. "There can be no harm in your
keeping it--at least until we find whether the authorities claim it
or not. I canna think that there would be any money value in it to
speak of. But you'd better be careful not to lose it at any rate."

"But the thing is of no use to me, sir, is it?" I asked.

"That's for you to find out, Halcro," said he. "You see it is a
sort of charm, or amulet. The old Scandinavian vikings used to
carry such things about with them, in the belief that by so doing
they would be protected from all personal harm. Our Jarl Haffling,
I suppose, wore this same amulet at his neck to ensure his safety
through the perils of the battle and the storm. No doubt he
believed that the possession of such a talisman gave him a charmed
existence. The sea could not drown him, sword could not wound him,
fortune favoured him, so long as he wore this little stone on his
breast."

"And yet, sir, the Jarl Haffling came to his grave in the Bay of
Skaill," I said incredulously.

"Ay, lad, so he did, so he did. But we must suppose that Odin, the
god of the Norsemen, had thought it time to reward him by calling
him off from his earthly battles to the Halls of Valhalla."

Captain Gordon here approached us, and whilst he and Mr. Drever
were bidding each other goodnight, I stood looking into the fire,
meditating upon the strange thing my schoolmaster had told me. I
put the little stone securely into my breast pocket, feeling the
new responsibility I bore in being guarded by such a mysterious
influence; for I did not doubt that the protection given by my
talisman to the dead viking would now be extended to myself.

Grace Drever had some instructions to give me regarding the taking
away of her cat, and when I left her my sister Jessie and Captain
Gordon were already walking together down the brae. I soon overtook
them. Jessie was questioning the captain about his ship.

"Father was saying she's a very good ship," said she; "but I think
mysel' that her masts are ower high; and if ye were taken in one o'
the spring gales off the Orkneys you'd find that they are, Mr.
Gordon."

"Did the pilot say that our masts are too high, Miss Ericson?"
asked the captain.

"Nay, I was thinkin' it mysel'," said Jessie, "when I saw the
barque lying near the Holms. High masts are good, I will allow, for
carrying a heap o' sails, but our whaling ships never have masts so
high as yours."

"Well, but you must understand," urged the sailor, "that we are not
bound for Davis Straits as your whalers are that went out today. In
the tropical seas, where there is often a calm lasting several
days, we need high masts and widespread sails, Miss Ericson."

"Yes, I ken that well enough," argued Jessie. "But I have seen many
a good ship wrecked on the Black Craigs in the spring time, and I
can aye tell when a ship will come back safe to Stromness."

Captain Gordon seemed to treat my sister's criticism of his ship
very lightly; but as events turned out, her warning was perhaps
justifiable.

When we turned into the Anchor Close, we found my father standing
at the house door, smoking his pipe and looking out for us.

"Where has the lad been?" he asked of Jessie before he greeted the
captain.

"I found him up at the dominie's," she explained.

And then she held out her hand to Mr. Gordon.

"Fare ye well, Captain Gordon!" she said; "fare ye well, and a good
voyage to you!"

And she glided past him into the house.

"Was the lass speakin' wi' you, skipper?" asked my father.

"Yes," said Gordon. "She was telling me that my barque's masts are
too high."

"Ay! but it's no' sae often that she'll speak wi' a man. She's a
blate lass wi' maist folk. But what kens she about a vessel's
masts, I wonder?"

My father, with his hands deep in his trousers pockets, then
stepped down to the jetty and looked through the darkness towards
the Lydia.

"Ay, but I'm no that sure about it either, Skipper. The masts are
higher than ordinary. But ye'll come ben the house and smoke a
pipe, maybe?"

"Thank you, pilot, I don't mind--just for a half hour before I go
out to the ship."

My father thereupon led the way within, and placed an easy chair
for Mr. Gordon under the large hurricane lamp that hung from the
low ceiling, and cast its yellow light about the room. The skipper
glanced rapidly at the dark, old-fashioned furniture, at the
high-backed chairs, cushioned with the skins of seals, the strong
teak-wood sideboard, and the heavy round table, upon which stood a
quaint Dutch spirit bottle and a couple of horn drinking cups. He
looked at the several pictures of ships battling with terrible
storms, and at the pensive porcupine in its dusty glass case, and
then at the array of firearms and harpoons above the door of the
press bed. My dog Selta lay sound asleep upon a large polar-bear
skin before the fire. Had he approached her and looked up the wide
chimney he might have seen there the remains of our winter stock of
smoked geese and hams hanging in the midst of the "reek."

"I suppose you have been sailing foreign a good deal in your time,
pilot?" said Mr. Gordon, when he was seated.

He had got this notion, no doubt, from having observed the many
foreign ornaments and weapons about the room.

"No," said my father, "I hae never been abroad. All my life has
been spent in the Mainland."

"You mean Scotland--the mainland of Scotland?" said the captain,
not seeming to understand the meaning of the "Mainland," which I
may here explain is our local name for Pomona island--the largest
of the Orkneys.

"No, I didna mean Scotland, skipper--though, to be sure, I hae been
over there many a time. We call this the Mainland, where we are
just now. Many folks make the same mistake about that. I mind of a
skipper named Jock Abernethy. Jock had a brig o' his ain, though he
kent naething aboot navigation, whatever. Weel, a lang while past
it is noo, he was takin' his brig frae Portree, in Skye, across to
the West Indies. His crew was nae better nor himsel'. Weel, when
they had been at sea twa or three months, Jock cam on deck ae
mornin', and, 'Donald,' says he to his mate, 'd'ye not see land
yonder to starboard?'

"'Ay, sir,' says Donald; 'I'm just thinkin' it will be the West
Indies.'

"'You're right there, Donald, the West Indies it is,' says Jock.
'See, yonder's the black folk sittin' waitin' for us!' and he
pointed to the cormorants perched on the rocks.

"So the brig was hauled round, and when she was near inshore a
pilot boat cam oot to them. Jock hailed the pilot: 'What land is
that?' he cried.

"'It's the Mainland!' sings out the pilot.

"'What! the mainland o' America?' asks Jock, thinkin' he had missed
the Indies.

"'No, ye duffer, the Mainland o' Orkney, to be sure,' says the
pilot. 'What other Mainland is there?'"

As I sat on my low stool by the fire, my mother and Jessie being in
the inner room, I took the viking's charm from my pocket and
examined it. Captain Gordon had lighted his pipe, and when my
father's anecdote was finished he said:

"Now, Halcro, my lad, lay aft here and let us have another look at
that magic stone of yours."

And then, as I handed it to him, he proceeded to tell my father of
our discovery of the treasure.

The two men discussed the probable value of what we had found, and
I felt some disappointment in their estimate of what the dominie
might be able to sell the relics for.

"It is very good to find these things," said my father, blowing a
mist of tobacco smoke from amidst his beard. "But what use are
they, whatever? Nae use ava! The dominie might send them to the
museum folk at Edinburgh, and he would get mebbe a pickle pounds
for them--hardly enough for the lads to buy an auld boat wi'. I
wouldna be bothered wi' the things."

"What was it the old woman was saying about this stone, though,
Halcro?" asked the captain.

I repeated what Grace Drever told me--how the stone might protect
me from accident and from the monsters of the sea; from the kraken
and the kelpie, the warlocks and the wirracows; and how, having the
charm at my neck, I need never fear climbing a cliff or entering
upon the most dangerous adventure.

"And do you believe all this, my lad?" asked Captain Gordon, taking
his pipe from his lips and addressing me.

"Well," I returned, with an earnestness that must have shown that I
had not the smallest doubt upon the matter, "auld Grace Drever said
it was 'as true as death,' and the dominie did not deny that it was
'just possible.' What for should I not believe it? and what for
would the stone be bound with the gold ring and buried with the
other gear if it were not of some value beyond ordinary?"

"Och! but I dinna doot there will be something in the stone," said
my father, who, at the mention of the dominie's belief, cast away
all questioning. "And it will not be the first time I have heard of
such cantrips."

And he told us of a man named Willie Reoch, a fisherman, who was
preserved from the great Bore of Papa Westray in some such way.
Willie Reoch and three other fishers were away at the saith
fishing, and when their boat was driven by the wind near to the
Bore, they were drawn under by the whirling current and swamped.
Reoch had round his neck a charm which Bessie Millie, the witch,
had given to him, and so was the only one saved.

"Na, na," continued my father, "I dinna doot there will be
something wondersome in the stone; and if any person would have
such a thing, who would it be but the Norseman?"

Thus did I become convinced in my mind that, by the possession of
that little gold-encircled stone, I bore a charmed life.

That night I lay with my precious talisman under my pillow. I
thought of the events of the afternoon, and, remembering my fight
with Tom Kinlay, attributed my victory over him to the influence
which that talisman, then in my pocket, had already begun to work.
I tried to imagine what kind of adventures had befallen the old
viking whose bones we had disturbed, and wondered if I should ever
encounter any similar perils. My opportunities of adventure were
fewer than his could have been; but I determined to give my full
trust to the mysterious aid in which Jarl Haffling had trusted in
the ancient days. Then I heard my father unmooring the boat from
the pier to take Captain Gordon out to his ship, and as the sound
of the oars in the rowlocks died away in the night I fell asleep.



Chapter XII. A Tragedy And A Transportation.


I was up and about on the following morning when the town was yet
asleep. A cool, dewy mist hung in the air, and the rising sun
spread a rosy bloom on the eastern sky. When I arrived at Andrew
Drever's house there was no one moving within, but the door was not
locked, and quietly lifting the latch I went inside to find the cat
Baudrons, that I might take him out to the Lydia according to my
promise.

I made so little noise that even the jackdaw did not seem to notice
my entrance, and I looked to his cage on the side table. To my
surprise the cage door was standing wide open and Peter was not
there. But presently, from the school room, I heard him chattering
and croaking. Following the sound of his voice I discovered the
bird perched high upon the dominie's desk looking down at Baudrons,
who crouched below him on the floor in the very act of preparing to
spring, his checks swelled out and his great tail lashing the dusty
floor. The door creaked as I opened it, and before I could
interfere the cat was upon the desk with Peter struggling in his
claws. Peter left a few black feathers in Baudron's possession, and
escaping, flew over to the table by the window, where he hopped
about with the greatest coolness, muttering, "William the
Conqueror, ten sixty-six"--words which he had gathered from our
history lessons in the school. Baudrons was after him in a moment.

And now followed a terrible encounter. Instead of flying away the
bird deliberately met the cat and stabbed at him valiantly with his
long, heavy beak. They fell over on the floor together, and as they
struggled, amid much noise of growling and chattering and flapping
of wings, I flung my cap at them, trying to effect a separation.
Alas! before I could help the dominie's pet, the cat had the
uppermost of him, and ran off into the schoolmaster's private room
with the jackdaw held firmly in his teeth.

I followed, and tried to make the animal loosen his grip of poor
Peter. He growled and spat as I approached him, and, fearing for
the jackdaw's life, I hammered with my fist upon the door of the
schoolmaster's press bed and called out: "Mr. Drever! Mr. Drever!"

The dominie opened the bed door and sprang out to the rescue, his
red woollen nightcap upon his head. But his help was of little use.
We managed to get the cat away from his prey; but the bird was
fatally injured, blood was dripping from his neck as the good man
took him up in his hands caressingly.

"Poor Peter, poor Peter!" said he; "who has done this thing?"

"William the Conqueror," faintly uttered the bird.

Then giving a few feeble croaks, he died in the schoolmaster's
hands.

Andrew Drever's tender emotion grew into anger as he thought of the
murderer of his pet jackdaw, and he paced the room vowing vengeance
against his mother's cat, which had now escaped into comparative
security on the top of the kitchen cupboard.

"Come down here, ye wretch!" he exclaimed, taking up a knife from
the table and holding it up threateningly. "Come down here, ye foul
fiend. How dare ye touch a feather o' my Peter's wing?"

"Dinna kill the cat, sir," I interposed, reminding him that I was
there to take the animal aboard the Lydia.

"Man, Halcro," said Andrew, sobering down, "I wish you had taken
him away yestreen. But come, let us catch the brute and away with
him, for he shall not bide in this house another hour."

While Mr. Drever got an empty meal bag and held it open, I took a
long broom handle, and, standing on a chair, forced the cat to come
down. We chased the animal about the room until we cornered him,
when, putting the meal bag over his head, we made him a secure
prisoner. Tying up the bag with a string, and cutting some
breathing holes, I carried the captive cat away, leaving Andrew
Drever to grieve over the death of Peter the jackdaw.

When I rowed out to the Lydia in my little boat, the mist had
melted away in the warmth of the sun. The gray town, with its blue
film of peat smoke slowly rising into the clear air, was reflected
upon the smooth water that lapped and lisped against the stone
piers. The bubbling track of my boat as she plunged and curtsied in
obedience to the oar strokes alone disturbed the calm surface of
the bay; but beyond the shelter of the harbour a brisk breeze
fluttered the Blue Peter at the barque's foremast, and I did not
fail to notice that it came from a favourable quarter.

Father was already aboard when my boat scraped gently along the
ship's side, and he threw a rope end down to me to climb up by.

Captain Gordon shook hands with me when I reached the quarterdeck.

"Well, my lad," said he, "how d'ye think the Lydia looks for sea?"

"She looks well and trim," I said, untying the mouth of the meal
bag; "but I notice she has a slight list to the port side."

"A list to port!" said he looking forward. "Ha! that's unlucky. I
wish it had been to starboard; but as it's not much, the men may
not notice it. I fancy they'll see more of ill luck in this cat."

When I opened the bag, Baudrons escaped with a good dusting of
flour on his fur. The cat looked wildly uneasy; he showed no signs
of that gentle docility which Grace Drever admired in him; but with
his cheeks puffed out and the loose skin about his nose and head
drawn up in uncanny wrinkles, he dashed across the deck once or
twice, lashing his tail from side to side like a savage brute, and
then, approaching the main hatchway, he made a great spring down
the hold, there to enjoy himself amongst the mice.



Chapter XIII. In Which I Receive A Present.


While all was busy on deck, Captain Gordon took my father and me
below to his cabin. It was a neatly fitted-up room with many books
and pictures and maritime instruments that interested me. What most
attracted my attention was the captain's private collection of
fishing tackle and his armoury. There were some fine landing nets
and rods with bright brass rings and reels, and the artificial
flies were quite confusing in their number and variety. In the
armoury were several six shooters of different patterns, and many
double-barrelled guns and ornamented rifles. Captain Gordon allowed
me to handle some of these, and he explained their mechanism to me.

One little fowling piece that I examined was so light and so
beautifully made that I returned to it again and again while the
captain and my father were talking together. It had a long steel
barrel with delicate engraving upon it, and a carved stock. I was
admiring the spring of the trigger work when Captain Gordon asked
me if I was a good shot.

"I have never fired a gun in my life," I said.

To my surprise he said, "You may have that gun in your hand if
you'll accept it."

"O, but I canna think of taking it from you, captain!" I replied.

"No, no, he'll shoot himself," objected my father; "and that will
not be so good as if he fell ower the cliffs. What will the lad
want wi' a gun?"

"But I'd like to give it him, pilot. He'll soon learn how to use it
properly.

"Won't you, Halcro?

"And as for shooting himself, why, remember the magic stone,
pilot."

Father muttered something to the effect that it was very good of
the captain; and I, who was overwhelmed with gratitude for his
kindness, feebly added my thanks. So Captain Gordon gave me the
fowling piece, together with a canister of gunpowder, and
sufficient swan shot, I thought, to kill all the wild fowl in
Orkney.

As I was leaving the ship, joyous in the possession of these ample
materials for a whole summer of sport, and was bidding farewell to
Captain Gordon, the mate came towards us at the rail and touched
his hat.

"Well, Marshall, d'you want anything sent ashore?" asked the
skipper.

"Yes, sir," said Marshall, "I want to tell you that the men are
grumbling about this cat being brought aboard. You know how
superstitious they are. They want the lad to take it away with him
again."

"Their objections are silly and childish, Marshall," said Mr.
Gordon. "They know that the ship is overrun with mice."

"Yes, yes, sir; that's all very well. But they won't have the cat
aboard; and I think you'd better have the beast sent off."

"The men are a pack of fools. What harm can the poor cat do them,
I'd like to know? They think it's unlucky, I suppose. Well, if they
will have it so, send a couple of them down the hold to capture the
animal. We must just bear the mice if the cat cannot remain. Look
smart, now, the boy's in a hurry to get to his school."

Two men were then sent below to search for Baudrons, and I waited
for their return. In about a quarter of an hour one of them came to
say that the cat could not be found.

"Very well, then, I can't keep the lad here any longer. We must
send the cat ashore with the pilot."

Then the captain turned to me.

"Goodbye, Halcro, my lad!" he said; "perhaps we'll be back in
Orkney on our homeward voyage. Maybe you'll be a pilot yourself by
that time, and bring us into port. Goodbye!"

"Goodbye, Captain Gordon!" I murmured; and at that I slipped over
the taffrail and was soon sitting in my boat again, rowing back to
the town.



Chapter XIV. Thora.


On my way to the school that morning I chanced to meet Hercus and
Rosson coming down one of the side alleys.

"I say, lads," I began, "d'ye ken what Dominie Drever says about
the siller things we found at Skaill?"

"No! what is it, Hal?" asked Hercus.

"Why, he says that it was an old sea king's grave that we
discovered--one of those viking lads that we read about in the
history book."

"You don't say so!" exclaimed Rosson.

"Yes, and he says that we must take all the siller to him at the
school. There's some law about it all, and we canna keep the
things. We maun give them up."

"Will ye give your share up, Hal?" asked Hercus.

"I hae done so already," I said. "I left it wi' the dominie
yestreen."

The lads looked at each other, but neither offered any objection.

"Oh, very well!" said Rosson, "I'll bring mine down i' the
mornin'."

"And I mine," echoed Hercus.

During the first lesson in school it was noticed that Tom Kinlay
was absent.

"Where is your brother this morning, Thora?" asked Mr. Drever.

"Please, sir," said Thora, "I was to tell you that he's not to come
to the school again. They're buildin' a new boat for father at
Kirkwall, an' Tom's to be aboard of her."

I thought it curious that Carver Kinlay should have a boat built in
Kirkwall, and not by our own local builder, Tammy Lang, of
Stromness. And what could this new boat be intended for?

"Ay, Thora, but that's somewhat sudden!" said the dominie. "Why did
he not wait till the end o' the week?"

Thora raised her blue eyes in my direction as though she would
appeal to me for an explanation. I did not then know, however, that
the true and immediate cause of Tom's absence was that he was not
in a fit condition to appear among his companions that morning on
account of the blow I had given him during our fight on the
previous evening.

After school time Thora came to me and told me of her brother's
return from the sealing expedition; of how he rushed into the house
with his nose bleeding. And she explained that, as they sat at
their porridge in the morning, she had noticed the purple patches
under his eyes and the swelling of the bridge of his nose.

I own that I felt extremely sorry for having inflicted these
injuries upon Tom, nor could I wholly hide from Thora the actual
cause of them. But when Mr. Drever asked about him Thora knew as
little of that cause as I did of the effect of my blow upon Tom's
nose.

Notwithstanding the many little quarrels between her brother and
herself, Thora was too generous to be glad at his misfortune; but I
fancied there was a glance of satisfaction in her eyes when I said
to her:

"It was a fight that we had, Thora. Tom and I quarrelled over some
old siller things we found across at Skaill when we were at the
sealing."

"And which of ye beat the other, Halcro?" she asked, with almost a
boy's interest in a stand-up fight. "But I needna ask that, surely;
for I can see fine that Tom had the worst of it. If it werena for
that wee scratch on your cheek I wouldn't hae kenned ye had been in
a fight; but as for Tom, why, he's just a perfect sight to look
upon!"

I need hardly say that my quarrel with Kinlay did in no wise alter
the friendship that existed between Thora and me. I had for her a
fondness which Tom's bullying and tyranny had no power to diminish.
Thora, indeed, was a girl whom none except those who were
influenced by envy could help admiring. She was the favourite of
all the school, and amongst us, her only enemy was her brother. My
own sympathy with her was all the greater because I knew that she
was so much the subject of his rule. I knew how he had forced her
to obey him, and to bend before all his humours and his whims, and
I was sorry for, whilst I was still unable to help her. In this
servitude we had been companions, in common with Rosson and Hercus;
and many a time had she come to me, with tears in her eyes, to tell
me of some new act of tyranny that she had suffered at her
brother's hands.

On one such occasion I found her down at the shore side with little
Hilda Paterson. She had been going out on the bay to paddle about
in a small boat that Tom was in the habit of using. He saw the two
girls taking the oars, and straightway he ordered them ashore,
striking Thora on the cheek, himself taking possession of the boat.

The two girls were standing in their disappointment on the beach
when I came up and heard their story.

"Never mind, Thora," I said. "Come along wi' me. I'll get my
father's dinghy, and we three will go for a fine sail."

I rowed them out beyond the Holms, for it was a bright calm day;
and when we got out into the breezy bay the mast was stepped, the
little lug sail hoisted, and then we went speeding over to Graemsay
island like a sheer water skimming the waves. Graemsay was our
imagined El Dorado, and on the voyage we fancied ourselves
encountering many surprising adventures. Shipwrecks and sea fights
were by no means uncommon events. We threw spars of wood over the
stern, and at the cry of "Man overboard!" the ship was put about to
pick him up. But while we easily overcame these imagined disasters,
there were some real dangers to encounter, and in the midst of our
merry talk and laughter we had ever to keep a careful watch on the
conduct of the boat, and to look out for the safest channels and
the sunken rocks. Hilda, who regarded the approach of an imagined
iceberg with complacency, became really timid when she noticed a
heavy squall coming towards us from the outer sea; and until the
sail had been lowered, and our bow hove round to meet the breeze
and let it pass, I believe she was not quite confident that I was
able to manage the boat in safety.

Thora had often referred to this pleasant sail, and the few
primroses I had gathered for her on the banks of a rivulet running
down one of the Graemsay glens she had worn at her neck for many
days. Many a time when, from our place in the class, she had seen
through the window the red-sailed fishing boats battling with the
sudden gusts of wind in the rapid currents of the Sound, she would
look as though she would remind me of the way we had managed the
dinghy in the same dangerous flow. Thus did she begin to trust me,
as mariners trusted my father.

If it had not been that during the lessons, in common with his
pupils, Andrew Drever took a secret pleasure in looking through the
little window across Stromness harbour, and, from his position at
the desk, watching the movements of the shipping, it is probable he
would have erected some curtain there. The window offered a
distraction to us all, for it often took our attention from our
tasks, and caused many interruptions in the course of the day. But,
as I have indicated, Andrew was not a severe taskmaster, and that,
perhaps, was one reason of our affection for him.

This morning his glances were divided between the empty bird cage
at the door and the barque now making ready for sea. His poor
jackdaw with its chattering--a sound once so monotonous and
wearying, now most earnestly wished for--was gone, but the murderer
of his pet, the brutal Baudrons, was now closely stowed away under
the main hatches of the Lydia, and the dominie had his revenge.

There was at least one other pair of eyes watching the trim barque,
as her unfurled canvas caught the breeze and she sped away like a
graceful gull. To my sister Jessie, whom, after school, I found
sitting by the little pier at the Anchor Close, the vessel seemed
to be carrying away one who had suddenly awakened in her a new
interest in life. Captain Gordon had spoken but little with her, he
was still but a stranger, but so seldom did she have speech with
any man, that this meeting with one so brave and handsome as the
captain of the Lydia naturally made a deep impression upon her.

I should not, however, have remarked anything unusual in
Jessie--except perhaps that she was less active with her
fingers--had not my mother, who came out to wash some dishes in the
sea, taken notice of my sister's vacant eyes.

"One would fancy, Jessie," said my mother--"one would fancy that
there was no wind out yonder that you send so many sighs to fill
the captain's sails. What like a man is he?"

"Dinna ask such questions, mother," said Jessie. "I saw him only in
the gloaming. His voice was like the sighing of the waves and his
eyes were like the seal's. Ah! he'll not come back again to
Stromness, never again;" and as Jessie gave another sigh the ship
disappeared behind the Ness.

For long afterwards Jessie would speak of Captain Gordon, and I
noticed with what concern she heard each reference to him, made by
either myself or my father. Even the gun which the captain had
given me was some sort of a solace to her, for whenever I was
cleaning the weapon she would take it in her hands and admire the
elegant workmanship displayed in the ornamented stock and the
bright steel barrel, and then lay it down with a gentle sigh, and I
knew she was thinking of Mr. Gordon.



Chapter XV. In Which The Viking's Amulet Is Proved.


I availed myself of an early opportunity of trying my new gun. One
afternoon I found Robbie Rosson down at the shore side. He was
standing near to my boat, which was moored to the jetty, and
looking as though he would give anything for a sail in her.

"Are ye going for a sail today, Hal?" he asked meekly.

"Ay, I'll go, if you'll come with me, Robbie," I agreed. "If ye
like we'll take a run o'er to Hoy Head. I'll bring my gun, and
we'll have a shot at the geese."

Robbie's face brightened up at the prospect, and I went indoors to
fetch the gun and a supply of ammunition; also my climbing ropes,
in case we needed them.

We were soon in the boat. Robbie took the oars and rowed out until
we could hoist the little sail, and then we rounded the Ness and
got out into Hoy Sound. The wind was westward, and the current in
our favour, so that we had a grand sail across the sound to the
Kame of Hoy--Robbie at the tiller, and I sitting near him on the
windward gunwale. How our boat danced along and curtsied on the
green curling waves! How her bows lifted and fell and sent a belt
of foam alongside and away behind us in a bubbling track! O, it was
glorious, that sail across to Hoy! Sitting there in the sunshine,
the fresh breeze blowing in our faces, we had nothing to do but
tend the helm and keep the boat well to the wind, and away we sped.

Our enjoyment of the sail was so full that we spoke but little. We
talked of Tom Kinlay's work on his father's new boat, and made
surmises as to the nature of the trade or traffic it was to be
engaged in; but whether the boat was to be sent to the saith
fishing, or to be used as a tender to the ships, we could not tell.

There was one thing that Robbie wanted to set his mind easy about,
and that was the viking's amulet. In common with all the lads in
the school, he had heard of the wonderful powers attributed to this
little stone; and, like them, he was thoroughly credulous of its
ability to preserve me from personal harm, vet anxious as I was
myself to put it to the proof.

"I'd like fine if we could have a chance of adventure today," he
said, taking the stone in his hand as it hung by a cord from my
neck. "How can we be sure that the thing will be the saving of you,
if ye dinna put it to the trial?"

"We'll see, we'll see," I said. "But there's no use seeking danger
for the sake of trying the effects of the charm. Maybe we'll find
the danger without seeking it, however, and then we'll have the
proof."

As we sailed swiftly under the high cliffs of Hoy Head we watched
the mad plunging of the landward-rushing waves, and saw them hurl
themselves at the great rocks, leaping in clouds of spray. What a
rattle and a roar each wave made on the pebbles of the beach as it
drew back before returning to the charge! And in the midst of the
foam the sea birds circled and screamed in their flight.

We had some difficulty in finding a safe landing place among the
surge; but at last we steered the boat into the quiet Bay of the
Stairs, and soon drove her nose into the stony beach and drew her
well up out of the water, fastening her painter round a large rock.

Safely landed, Robbie shouldered the climbing ropes and I took the
gun, having a stock of dry powder and shot in my pockets. We
climbed over some large boulders into the next creek, where, as we
had expected, we found a multitude of noisy sea birds, some
floating on the clear pools on the shore; others running about
among the sea-worn stones or seeking food with busy beaks in the
bright green and crimson weeds that lay in patches among the
pebbles. The ledges of the cliffs were crowded with gulls, whose
plumage was as snowy as the very foam that the high waves scattered
over their ranks. In a little cove at the extremity of the bay were
scores of kittiwakes, chattering over some dead fish thrown up by
the sea.

Here was a rare hunting ground for two eager young sportsmen! Close
to us a couple of turnstones, smart little birds in brown, with
bright-red legs and beaks, were busy on a heap of kelp. I levelled
my gun at them, and was about to fire, when Robbie stayed my hand
and pointed to a large cormorant sheltered in a deep niche of the
cliff and looking darker even than the dark rock over its head. I
altered the direction of my aim, keeping well out of the bird's
sight, with my back against a wall of granite.

It was well for me that I did so, for without this support in the
rear I should surely have fallen. When I drew the trigger I
received a fearful blow in the chest from the butt of the gun and a
thump on the back from the rock. The report of the gun sounded loud
through the chasms, and the echo was repeated along the line of the
cliffs and far over among the glens, as though a whole volley of
musketry had been fired. Birds flew about in all directions,
uttering wild cries of warning to each other. The air was crowded
with flying gulls.

When the smoke cleared away we looked for our cormorant, and there
he was, perched on the same bald point of rock, coolly preening his
black feathers. Then, as we ran up towards him, he stretched forth
his long neck, raised his wings, and sped away across the sea.
Either I had missed my shot, or the bird's tough skin had felt no
sensible touch. And where now were all our birds? Far out over the
gray sea they flew, secure from the range of our gun.

We waited long for their return, but only an occasional kittiwake
soared high above us, and some, bolder than the rest, presently
returned to their brooding places on the cliffs. We could not think
of firing while the gulls were on the wing, they swept past us so
quickly. We therefore scrambled over some abutting rocks into a
further bay, and still onward along the rough beach as far as the
stack of Hellia--a great steep rock standing out in the sea under
the frowning height of St. John's Head--and here we found as large
a number of birds as we had formerly seen.

We had arranged to take our shots turn about, and now it was
Robbie's turn. Having charged the gun, we stood quiet for a time,
patiently awaiting our chance. A carrion crow flew to a rock
between us and the water's edge. Robbie was ready. He took a
deliberate and steady aim and fired. A feather dropped from the
bird as it took flight.

"Man, Hal, I think that hit him!" exclaimed Robbie, running up to
secure the feather.

"Ay," said I. "But I'm thinking we both want some practice, Robbie.
We'll have no birds today, I reckon. Let's put up some cock-shy on
yon rock and fire at it. There's no use shooting at the birds.
We'll hit them, maybe; but we'll not kill anything, I'm feared."

So we erected a tall stone on the top of a rock, and, standing some
paces from it, practised firing at the object until we could hit
it, perhaps, once out of half a dozen tries. But we soon got tired
of this play, and I proposed climbing up to the top of the cliffs,
for all the birds seemed to be flying high.

Walking along to a broken cleft of the headland, where a burn came
down from the hills through a long gorge, we turned up the ravine
and mounted the heights. No sooner were we up there, however, than
we found that the birds were all below us on the beach.

We were making our way up the ravine, Robbie carrying the climbing lines
and I the loaded gun, when a large sea bird with wide-sweeping wings
flew just over our heads. Without thinking of hitting him, but simply
wishing to empty the gun of its charge in case of accident, I took aim
and fired. The great bird faltered in its flight, one of its wings
seemed to lose all power, and then with a circling swoop he came down
with a thud upon a grassy knoll beside the stream.

It was a fine solan goose. He was quite dead when we reached him,
for I had shot him under the right wing.

My good fortune excited Robbie to such a degree that he would not
be satisfied without again trying a shot. So we loaded the gun once
more, and about half a mile further up the glen he had the luck to
knock over a small rabbit. This was the extent of our sport.

To climb up this wild and desolate glen was no easy matter, for I
must tell you that St. John's Head, the summit of which we had to
cross before getting back to our boat (for the tide would not allow
of our return by the beach), stood above the sea to a height
considerably over a thousand feet. The goose and our climbing ropes
were also tiring burdens, and we had many times to take rest beside
the stream and quench our thirst in its cool water. Some distance
above the sea the ground became smoother, and broken rocks gave
place to short heather, which was softer for our bare feet.

When at last we reached the top of the Head, and our trouble was
over, we sat down on the breezy front of the hill and looked far
away across the restless water, where the sea line melted into the
blue haze of the Scotch coast. Nearer to us the water itself was
blue, then pale green with bands of purple above beds of weed, and
over all the white waves curled into foaming crests, silent to us
as snow. Southward, along the cliffs, a high steeple rock--the Old
Man of Hoy--stood like a sentinel guarding the coast, his head on a
level with the cliff behind him; and rounding Rora Head were the
brown sails of a few fishing craft making for Stromness.

"Come, Robbie," I said, when we had feasted our eyes on this scene.
"Come, we must be getting home. The tide has turned this long while
past, and we'll be hungry before we're back to Stromness."

We were, indeed, already somewhat hungry, and regretted we had not
brought food with us instead of the climbing ropes, which had not
so far been required. To think of getting anything to eat where we
were was needless, for we were on the most desolate part of the Hoy
island, and not a house was there for miles away.

The walk back along the ridge of the cliffs was easy, the ground
sloping downward in our favour. About a mile further on we came to
the cliffs below which our boat was moored. But, alas! we had been
sadly out in our reckoning. The boat was afloat, deep down there,
tugging desperately at her rope and grinding her sides against a
rock. To get down to her was now a problem. From our high position
we could see how the tide had risen well above the rocks by which
we had climbed from one bay to the other, and our only course was
to descend by the steep precipice surrounding the creek wherein the
boat was moored. There was no possible way down except by the use
of the ropes, and this was an extremely difficult and dangerous
undertaking, for the cliffs rose fully three hundred feet in
height, and our lines, of which we had two, would scarcely, when
joined together, measure more than half that length. For we used
them for the cliffs of Pomona, which are not in any place so high
as those of Hoy.

We had a long consultation first, as to which of us should make the
descent. Robbie offered to go down, as he was the lighter weight
and I the stronger for holding the upper end of the rope. Yet I was
a little afraid of letting him undertake so difficult an adventure,
being conscious that he had had less practice at cliff climbing
than I.

"Robbie," I said, "let me go down. You can hold the line--" and
then suddenly remembering my magic stone, I added, "and remember,
Robbie, that I have this little stone to keep me from harm."

At once Robbie cast away all fear and became quite confident.

"What fools we were not to think of that!" he exclaimed. "Come
away, let us tie the lines together, and you'll go down as safe as
a bird, Hal. Hooray! we have a chance of testing the worth of the
stone after all!"

Robbie's confidence gave me courage--or was it the remembrance of
the viking's charm that made me bold? However it be, I now thought
no more of going down this unfamiliar precipice than if it had been
one of those that were so well known to me on the Mainland.

Having tied the two ropes securely together, we looked for a
convenient point at which to make the descent. We went out to the
furthest part of the embayed cliff, and looking over to the
opposite precipice saw a suitable spot less steep than the rest,
and where also, some distance below the brink, there was a
projecting pinnacle of rock which might serve as a pillar round
which to secure the rope.

We took the climbing line and cast one end of it over the cliff,
letting it fall as far down as the pinnacle I have mentioned.
Robbie then held the rope, with the help of a boulder of rock round
which he secured it, and I proceeded to lower myself down the
steep. It was easy work getting to the pinnacle; but this was only
the beginning. I whistled up to Robbie when I had gained a sure
footing, and he let down the rest of the rope. And now I had to
manage everything else unaided, for Robbie could not, with what
contrivances he had on the top of the cliff, have been of any
further help. Before I had cast the rope over the point of rock, he
was across at the far side of the embayment, where he could watch
my progress and give me directions.

Having passed the line over the rock pillar and allowed the two
ends to hang down in equal lengths, I climbed over, and with
considerable difficulty caught hold of the double rope, by which I
let myself slowly and cautiously down, now holding to the face of
the rocks with hand and foot, now swarming down by the ropes alone,
until a cry from Robbie warned me that I was coming to the end of
the lines. Fortunately I was able to reach a ragged point where I
could once more get a firm foothold.

Resting there, I reflected that I was not yet halfway down the
precipice; and now I had to think of how I should manage to haul
the rope down and secure it to another projecting rock. The only
suitable point I could see was some yards away from me to the right
side, and I had to climb upward again before I could find a shelf
by which to approach it. After a tedious attempt--during which my
magic stone came very near to proving its power--I at last reached
the desired place. A gull fluttered away with a wild cry as with
bleeding fingers I held on to the ledge of rock; and there I found,
nestling upon their bed of moss and weeds, a pair of woolly little
chicks which stared strangely at my intrusion.

My safety, perhaps even my life, depended upon my getting astride
of that small rocky point where the young gulls sat. In my
extremity I took hold of one of the chicks, intending to throw it
down the cliffs; but the mother bird flew towards me with such
piteous cries that even in my danger I could not be so cruel, so I
removed the little ones to a crevice close at hand and seated
myself upon their nest, thankful of the refuge it afforded. And now
I heard a shrill whistle from Robbie Rosson, by which I understood
that, seeing my comparative safety, he was going to find some place
where he could get down to the beach, there to wait until I should
bring the boat round for him.

But I must say that I thought my chances of ever getting round to
him were very small. I was not by any means so safe as he seemed to
think, for being once seated on that shelf of the cliff I found
that my next difficulty would be to turn round with my face to the
rock in order to continue the perilous descent.

I had now to get my rope down from the height above me. First then
I tied one end of the line round my body so that the rope might not
fall, and, allowing the other end to hang slack, began to haul
away. Things went well for a few moments, and the rope answered to
every pull I gave. But, alas! there came a check. I had let loose
the wrong end, and the knot by which we had connected the two lines
had caught in some crevice. Try as I might I could not loosen it;
yet I was not certain that its hold was firm enough for me to
venture climbing up again by the portion of the rope that I held in
my grasp.

My thoughts were fearful. Here was I, stranded on this ledge of
rock, midway up the face of a steep precipice, the sea roaring far
beneath me, and with no obvious means of escape either above or
below.

My boat looked small away deep down there as she tugged at her
mooring line and tossed wildly about in the rising tide. O, how I
wished that I was seated at her helm, and in sight of my beloved
Stromness!

Instinctively I felt for my magic stone. It hung safely under my
knitted shirt. I trusted in the security it gave me, and my courage
was renewed. The way out of my predicament was so hopeless, my
danger so great, that I solemnly resolved, should I ever reach home
again, to attribute my escape from this peril to the intervention
of the viking's talisman.

Long and wearily I waited, contemplating the difficulties of my
situation, and in the end I almost determined to hazard the further
descent without the help of the rope, trusting merely to the skill
of my hands and feet.

My first endeavour was to get back along the shelf of rock until
the rope should hang perpendicularly. Accordingly I restored the
young seagulls to their nest, turned myself round with my face to
the cliff, and, with much difficulty, retraced my way for some
distance. I was in a half-creeping position, holding by the right
hand to niches of the cliff, when, a sharp corner of stone digging
into my knee, I stumbled, and would surely have fallen far down
upon the rocks of the beach, had I not still held firmly to the
rope.

The sudden jerking, however, did one good thing; it loosened the
knot from the place where it had been held in the rock above, and
the rope itself came down by its own weight until it hung from my
waist where I had tied it.

The further descent was now performed with comparative ease, and in
the manner I had at first intended. I hung the rope at half its
length over a point of rock, seeing now that it had a free run, and
allowing the two ends to fall. Then I swarmed down the double line
until I found another suitable place for hanging the rope by. Thus
making the descent by repeated stages, I stepped at last upon the
level rocks of the beach, sincerely thankful for my escape from so
great peril.

When I scrambled over the rocks towards the boat I found she was
floating in full three fathoms of water, so that my only course was
to swim out to her. This, however, was a small matter after what I
had gone through. I stripped myself on one of the outlying rocks,
and plunging into the water soon reached the boat and clambered
over the stern. I was obliged to "slip the anchor," for the painter
was tied deep below the water and had to be sacrificed. But I did
not take long to recover my clothes and dress myself, and then I
took to the oars with a will and rowed along the shore in search of
Robbie.

Steep and frowning looked the great cliff that I had come down. I
regarded it with a new interest, and felt some sense of pride and
satisfaction in my narrow escape from so serious a danger. Again I
took my viking's stone in my fingers, and my faith in it was
complete.

Robbie was patiently waiting for me seated on one of the outer
rocks in a further bay. His face brightened as he saw me rounding
the point.

"Man, Ericson," he exclaimed joyfully, "I'm real glad to see ye
again! I e'en thought ye'd met wi' some mischance. I was terribly
feared!"

"Feared, were you? Well, so was I; but I managed all right, you
see, thanks to the viking's charm."

Robbie brought on board the gun, with his rabbit and the dead
gannet. And then we rowed back to Stromness. It was long past
sundown when we rounded the Ness point, and the beacon lights were
streaming over the bay, but we reached the little quay at the end
of the Anchor Close without any mishap. Both of us were very hungry
after our sport.

On that evening, I remember, I spent a very happy time at the home
fireside. My uncle Mansie was there, with my father, and my mother,
and Jessie. It was almost the first occasion on which I was
permitted to join in the conversation with my elders. But the
evening has ever since had a pathetic interest in my memory; for,
as it turned out, it was the very last time that our family sat
together in an unbroken circle.

"Ye're gettin' to be quite a good boatman, Hal, to gang all that
way under sail," said Mansie; and then he turned to my father,
saying, "When are we to hae the lad aboard the Curlew, Sandy?"

"Weel," replied my father, putting his great brown hand with
affection upon my shoulder, "I hae been thinkin' it was about time
he joined us. The lad has been at the school lang enough, mebbe.

"Are ye at the head o' the class yet, Halcro?"

"Nay, father, he's no that yet," interposed Jessie, "for Thora is
aye before him."

"Thora can read better than I can," I said, "and she kens mair
geography. She's better at the Latin, too; but the dominie says I'm
the best at history, and writin', and accounts."

"Ye'll no need very muckle Latin to be a pilot, however," said my
father. "But it's a pity ye're not better at the geography. How
many islands have we in Orkney? Can you tell me that?"

"Seventy-two--twenty-eight islands and forty-four holms."

"And can ye name them all, the twenty-eight islands?"

"Yes, the dominie taught us them last Martinmas;" and I proceeded
to name them, from the North Ronaldsay down to the Muckle Skerry of
Pentland.

"Very good!" said my father; "and d'ye ken ony thing about the
sounds? Where's the Sound o' Rapness?"

"There's a puzzle for ye, Hal," said my mother.

"Ah! I warrant the laddie kens it," said Mansie.

"Is it not between Westray and Fara?" I ventured doubtfully.

"Right again!" exclaimed Mansie, slapping his knee. "Oh! we'll mak'
a pilot o' the lad yet."

"Ay," said my father, "we maun hae him aboard the first fine day."

"Dear me, father," objected my mother, "d'ye really think it wise
to tak' the laddie frae the school, an' him gettin' on sae weel wi'
the dominie?"

"Tut, goodwife," said he, "the laddie maun begin to learn the
piloting some time; an' the sooner the better, say I.

"Hand me over the tobacco jar, Jessie."



Chapter XVI. Wherein I Go A-Fishing.


A few days after the sailing of the Lydia the weather broke. The
morning mist lay heavy on the islands, and the lofty Ward Hill of
Hoy hid his crown in the lowering clouds; the Bay of Stromness was
glassy calm. High above the rain goose shrieked its melancholy cry,
and the sea mews and sheldrakes, even the shear waters and bonxies,
flew landward to the shelter of the cliffs. On the upland meadows
the cows sniffed the moist air and refused to eat, and the young
lambs sought the protection of their parents' side.

My sister Jessie, with evident thought of Captain Gordon, noticed
these signs of approaching storms.

But if to her they portended ill, to me they meant good sport; for
what could be more favourable to a day's fishing than a sprinkle of
rain and a good westerly wind?

Telling my mother one Saturday morning that I would stay over
Sunday at my uncle Mansie's farm at Lyndardy, I started off with my
fishing tackle and my dog, with the intention of catching a few
trout in the stream I had so strongly recommended to the
schoolmaster.

The dog was certainly no necessary companion for a fishing
excursion; but Selta had learned to follow me on such occasions
without interfering with my sport, and I got into the way of
talking with her, and found comfort in her dumb companionship.

Passing through the hamlet of Howe, I reached the Bush at a point
where that wide stream runs into Scapa Flow by the Bay of Ireland.
This, I had found, was a favourite resting place for sea trout
before running into the lochs, and here I enjoyed good sport for
the whole morning.

I fished upstream--as I think a true angler should do--for though,
as Andrew Drever held, fishing downward was the easier method of
the two, especially with the wind at his back, yet I preferred my
own way, just as I preferred fishing with artificial fly to fishing
with bait, merely because it was more difficult and more surely
exercised my skill.

The third cast I made filled me with an enthusiasm I long had
known. A sudden jerk at the line and a fish was hooked. I paid out
more line as the trout darted off, then drew in as it slackened
again. Once more, as the fish felt the strain, he plunged off. I
saw him jump, and his scales flashed in the gray light like a
bright blade of steel, a loop of line gathering round him. At
length the prize was taken, and a fine sea trout was brought
exhausted to the bank.

Thus I fished, now wading to the knees in the rapid stream, now
sitting on a large stone readjusting my flies. Before noon the rain
fell heavily, but by the time that I reached the Bridge of Waithe
my basket was full, and I walked along the road as far as Clouston,
the dog following in the wet with drooping, draggling tail, and
ears dripping with the rain.

My clothes were wet through and I was cold, and, wishing for
shelter and a bite of food, I turned across the heath to Jack
Paterson's croft. I opened the door of the little cottage without
knocking, and found Jack and his wife Jean at home, with their
family of six waiting for their midday meal. Hilda, the eldest
girl, was arranging some wooden dishes on the table ready for the
potatoes.

Poor as the place was, I received a true and simple welcome, and I
was glad of the shelter and the warmth, for the wind was whistling
round the eaves and the heavy rain pelting against the little
window.

Jack Paterson was a poor crofter, who added to his scanty means by
going to the deep-sea fishing, or, out of the fishing season, by
burning kelp. These occupations, combined with the produce of his
croft, made up, I am afraid, a very poor living. The cottage was
small, so small that I always wondered how so large a family could
live in its one little room with any comfort. In the middle of the
clay floor, on a stone slab, was a large peat fire, the smoke of
which escaped by a hole in the roof, where the rain came through.
By the side of the fire were two large high-backed chairs entirely
wisped round with straw, so that none of the framework could be
seen. In a great three-legged pot, which hung over the flaming
peats by a chain from the bare rafters, some potatoes were boiling,
and whilst they were cooking Jean Paterson cleaned and fried some
of my fish, which came, I think, as a welcome addition to the
family's meal.

Jack Paterson was a very tall, muscular man, with a long red beard
and soft brown eyes. His hands were the largest I have ever seen;
but the right one wanted a finger. This, I believe, was the only
exception that one could make in saying that Jack was absolutely
perfect in his great manhood. He would have made a splendid
man-o'-war's man, and the press gang had more than once tried to
secure him.

Not till long afterwards, when, as pilots, we were out at sea
together one clear starlight night, did he tell me how his finger
was lost. It happened at a time when the press gang were more than
usually busy in Orkney pressing men for a frigate that lay in
Stromness harbour. The blue jackets had had their eyes upon Jack
Paterson, but Jack, who was just about to be married to Jean Nicol,
did not intend being caught; and he said to Jean one day that
rather than enter the navy, he would cut one of his fingers off,
and so make himself unfit for service.

One dark night he was walking along one of the country lanes with
his sweetheart when a body of tars fell upon him, and, after a
sharp fight, carried him off to an old stable in the town that
served as a temporary lockup. Very early the next morning Jean
Nicol knocked gently at the stable door.

"Are ye there, Jack?" said she.

"Yes," replied Jack; and his warders, who were two foretop men,
allowed him to speak with her through the keyhole.

"I've brought your release," said Jean. "Put your hand under the
door and I'll give it to you."

Jack put his right hand through under the door, and felt something
cold placed across his forefinger. Then there was a knock as of a
mallet upon a chisel, and with a cry of anguish he drew in his hand
streaming with blood. Jean had cut off his finger. Now, a man with
a lame hand is of small account in the service, and so when the
lieutenant came and saw Jack's condition he released him, with a
round curse at having lost so fine a man, and the frigate sailed
away.

Jean got her punishment, however, and so did Paterson. Soon after
their marriage, and when Jack's hand was healed, he one day met a
man-o'-war's man who belonged to Stromness, and had been among the
pressed men. Jack heard from him of the cruise of the frigate, and
of a fight with the enemy, and a great store of prize money that
every man had shared. That prize money was a sore lump in Jack's
throat ever afterwards.

While I was talking with Paterson in his cottage, my dog sat
comfortably before the warm fire, the steam rising from her wet
hair. She did not appear to like leaving the cosy place; but when
we had finished the meal, and I was once more dry and warm, I
started off again in the pouring rain and the rising wind.

I did not wish to continue my fishing in such boisterous weather,
but contemplated a hasty walk over to my uncle's farm. Our way lay
westward in the face of the wind. The walk over the wet peat moss
was difficult and tiring, and when I reached the Ring of Brogar I
was glad to avail myself of the shelter afforded by the giant Druid
stones that stand and wait by the loch of Stenness.

All was desolation around: not a house was to be seen, nor any
living thing but my dog and a few wild birds that flew quickly
past. The only sounds were the beating of the rain and the distant
roar of the Atlantic waves upon the coast.

A slight lull in the tempest urged me on, and soon I had left far
behind me those mysterious old stones, that seemed through the
misty rain to waken into life. Like a procession of priests they
appeared to pass with bent heads and slow and stately pace along
the margin of the great stretch of water.

Crossing the swollen burn which connects the lochs of Cluny and
Stenness, and thinking only of my destination, I was called back by
a sharp bark from my dog. I turned, and found her encountering a
large otter that had been slipping down to the stream. Now, I had
the angler's hatred of otters, which abounded in these waters. Many
a time had I seen a prime fish lying dead on the banks with a
single bite taken out of the shoulder, and I looked upon the otter
as the common poacher of the neighbourhood. I went to the help of
Selta, for the dog was crouched down ready to spring upon the otter
when it should run out from behind the large stone where it had
retreated.

I cautiously removed the stone, and the animal slipped downward
towards the water.

"Now, now, Selta!" I exclaimed; and the dog made a rush at its
prey.

The otter, thus intercepted, showed fight. Selta made a snap at its
back, and raised her forepaw to hold her enemy down. The otter
caught the foot in its mouth, and I heard the bones crunch in the
vicious bite. Selta lost hold and fell over the otter's back; her
foot was released; but the otter, bringing up its head between the
dog's front legs, grasped Selta's throat with its sharp teeth. With
a piteous whine the dog tried to spring away, but her leg was too
much broken to support her, and the two animals rolled over on the
flat stone, the otter uppermost, still with its teeth in the dog's
throat.

And now I saw my first chance of interfering. I grasped the otter
by the back, and tried to drag it away. I had no boots on my feet,
or I might have used them. All I could do was to plant my foot on
the animal's back, and stand with all my weight upon it. The otter
thereat turned savagely upon me, and, unfortunately for myself, not
even the possession of the viking's charm could save me from those
sharp teeth.

With a fierce snarl the otter took hold of the back of my ankle,
its teeth penetrating the skin and tearing it over. I had sense to
bend down and grasp the animal with my hands and rapidly snap its
backbone, finishing my work by dashing a heavy stone upon its head.
Forgetting my own hurt, I then turned to look after my dog.

Selta was lying upon the wet stone, the blood trickling from her
throbbing neck. I knelt down beside my faithful companion, and took
the injured foot in my hand. The dog had strength only to raise her
head in recognition, with a mournful look in her pleading eyes.

"My poor doggie!" I moaned, utterly cast down; and my falling tears
were mingled with Selta's blood. The dog was dead.



Chapter XVII. How The Golden Rule Was Kept.


My first thought on leaving the scene of this combat was to let the
dead otter lie where it had fallen; but I remembered that young
Thora Kinlay had once in my hearing expressed a wish to have an
otter's skin, of which to make a pair of gloves, and I determined
to make use of the animal I had killed. But I could not carry both
the otter and my poor Selta, whom I had already determined to lay
to rest in the sea, and my only course was to strip the otter of
its skin then and there. This I did with help of my pocketknife,
and in spite of the heavy rain that poured in streams down my back.

You will imagine the physical discomforts of my further journey.
The ground was marshy and sodden, and I sank deep into it at every
step I took. My clothing was wet through and through, and my dog,
which I carried over my shoulder, was a burden so heavy and
inconvenient that only my love for my late companion and respect
for her lifeless body gave me sufficient strength to bear it for so
great a distance. And then the rain fell incessantly, and the wind
was full in my face.

Carver Kinlay's farm of Crua Breck was on my way to my uncle's, and
I thought I would stay there a few moments as I passed, to leave
the otter skin for Thora, and maybe get shelter and a drink of warm
milk. But not till I was almost at the door did I remember about my
recent fight with Tom.

In its exposed position on the bleak hillside the farmstead felt
the full force of the gale as it beat in fury against the front of
the house. The rain and the salt spray from the sea pelted upon the
windows, and laid low all Thora's flowers in the little garden. The
large fuchsia bush, which in summertime dangled its drooping
blossoms in rich profusion, seemed the only plant capable of
withstanding the rough blast; and the great gaunt jaws of the
Greenland whale, that formed an archway at the gate, trembled in
the tempest.

I went up to the door, and opening it stood within the shelter of
the porch for a while, and heard someone reading aloud. Soon I
gathered courage enough to approach the inner door, and look
through its little window into the room. A rousing fire of peats
and dried heather was blazing on the hearth, around which the
family were gathered in a half circle. In an armchair, with a open
book on his knee, sat Carver himself. By his side sat his wife
knitting a stocking, the firelight glinting on her fair hair. Near
to her were a ploughman and a herd boy, also a young woman who did
the light field work on the farm and milked the cows, made butter,
and helped in the house. Tom sat by the fire opposite his father,
and I could see that he was polishing with a piece of leather one
of his silver coins. Thora, whose silken hair and beautiful face I
regarded with greater satisfaction than any other feature of this
group, sat apart from the others, as though she did not care, or
had not been invited, to draw her stool nearer to the warmth.

Carver Kinlay, black bearded and hoarse of voice, was reading aloud
to his family, and seemed to be expecting from them an attention to
the Holy Word which he certainly did not sincerely give to it
himself. When he came to the end of a passage which he considered
required expounding, he would take off his reading spectacles and
wipe them with a corner of his wife's white apron.

"Now, I have explained many times before about this, bairns," he
was saying as he looked towards Thora and Tom. "It is a rule, a
golden rule, that the merest child might understand. Nothing can be
more beautiful or more important, and it just contains these few
words: 'Do unto others as ye would that others should do unto you.'
Now keep this precept in mind, all of you, for ye canna
misunderstand it. But, just to make the thing clear--

"Never mind the cat, Thora; just pay attention to the lesson--

"Just to make the thing clear, let us suppose an example. Now,
then, supposin', for instance, that Thora here saw a basin full o'
milk with thick cream on the top o' it, and that her teeth were
watering for just one lick. She ought to say to herself: 'Now,
here's a basin full o' good cream; I'd like fine to take one lick
of it. But it's the cream for making the butter of. Now, supposin'
I was your mother, how would I like my daughter Thora to come
and--'"

"Oh! Look, look!" cried Thora, "pussy's tail's burnin'!"

"Confound you, Thora!" exclaimed her father, angered at this
interruption. "Can you not pay attention, and let pussy mind her
own tail? I say, if you were your mother, how would you like your
daughter Thora to lick the cream?"

"Tut, goodman!" interposed Mrs. Kinlay, "what does the lass ken
about being a mother? Go on with the reading."

"Odd, goodwife, I'm but supposin' the thing; and the plainer it is
the better, and the easier to understand. However, what verse was
it, Thora?"

"It was the fourteenth you left off at," said Thora.

"Aweel, then, the fifteenth: 'Now, when he'--Odd, but I think we
read that before."

"Nay, you didna read it before, father, for it was the fourteenth
verse you left off at."

"Nay, I'm sure it couldn't be that, for I remember readin' 'Now,
when he,' before."

"But I'm sure, father, ye're wrong," persisted Thora. "Look you if
the fourteenth doesn't end with 'people,' and 'people' was the last
word you read."

"'People, people!'" said Carver, searching for the place. "Odd,
lassie, I see no 'people.' There's one verse that ends with
'people,' but it's not the fourteenth. It had been that, ye silly
lass, instead o' the fourteenth."

"Well, well, goodman, what dos't matter what verse you left off
at," said his wife. "A good tale's none the worse of being told
twice."

"Nay, but," said Thora, "just look for fun and see what the
fourteenth verse ends with."

"Fun, lassie! fun!" exclaimed Carver, as though he was seriously
shocked. "Would you speak o' fun and the Holy Scripture lying open
before you?"

"O, but, father, I had no mind. A body canna aye be minding. Look
and see not for fun, then."

"Tut, tut!" said the mother, becoming impatient, "can you not begin
at the fifteenth verse? What dos't matter if ye read it before?"

"Aweel, then, the fifteenth verse, 'Now, when he'"--

"Listen, father!" cried Thora, again interrupting, "did you not
hear something?"

"Well did I hear something, and I hear it yet--the rain pelting on
the window. I'm sure you've heard it this two hours and more."

"Nay, but it was like something twirling at the handle of the
door."

"You hear things nobody else hears, Thora. Who could be at the door
on a day like this? You just think you hear things. I was sure
'people' was not the last word."

Carver listened, however, for a time. The rain beat harder than
ever on the windows, and from the neighbouring cliffs came the
sound of the waves like a rumbling of distant thunder. But as he
looked up from his book I knocked gently on the door.

"Who's there?" he asked in a gruff tone that had in it no echo of
charity.

Thora rose from her seat and came towards the door, where I stood
in a stream of water that ran from my wet clothes.

"Oh, Halcro!" she exclaimed as she looked down at my cold, bare
feet and saw the blood issuing from the wound in my ankle. "Oh,
Halcro, what has happened?" and she opened wide the door to admit
me.

"What does the lad want here?" asked Carver.

I had never been asked such a question before. I had been
accustomed to go about the island all my boyhood, and to walk in at
any door I came to with the assurance that no person would question
me as to what I wanted. At length, without going further than the
threshold, I said:

"I was thinking you would give me shelter for a short time on a day
like this."

"On a day like this," replied he, "none but a fool would think of
travelling; and if it's shelter you're seeking here, young Ericson,
I say no!" and the unfeeling "No" was echoed by all the others in
the room, with one exception. That exception was Thora.

I saw the girl's hands quickly clench when she heard this unkind
dismissal, and in her blue eyes the tears welled up and stole
gently down her fair cheeks.

I felt that the "No" could be easily withstood, but the tears in
Thora's eyes overcame me. I gave her a look of thanks, closed the
door behind me, and again faced the storm, first going round to the
back of the house to take up in my arms the body of my poor dog. I
hung up the otter's skin on a hook in the byre, where I believed
Thora would discover it, and so make what use of it she might.

I carried the dog still further, however. Taking it down to a small
creek that gave entrance to the seashore, I came to a rock that was
washed by the deep waters, and here I tied a large stone around
Selta's neck and silently lowered the body into the sea, where the
great waves of the Atlantic murmured a solemn requiem.

Then, regaining the top of the cliff, I stood for a time looking
seaward, where the curling waves swept in from the west and dashed
with terrible strength against the hard rocks of granite. There was
no sail to be seen as far as my sight could penetrate through the
driving rain mists; but I knew that the storm would be fatal to
many a brave fisherman and sailor, and many a strong-built ship.

My sad thoughts and the noise of the breakers so much absorbed me
that I felt conscious of nothing so much as my utter loneliness.
But as I stood there in my wretchedness, suddenly a hand was laid
gently on my shoulder, and I looked round, to see Thora at my side,
with a great cloak thrown about her, and her hair streaming in the
wind.

"Halcro," she said, "it is not this way I can see you turned from
my father's door in the rain and the wind, and with that wound in
your foot. Pm sorry he spoke to you like that, for I'm sure you'll
be tired and weary.

"I have brought you some oatcake--see. Eat it, while I mend your
foot."

Then she knelt down before me on the wet, mossy rock, took a piece
of clean linen from under the cloak that covered her, and wiped
clean my wound. With her fingers she gently drew over the torn
skin, and taking another piece of white cloth bandaged it neatly
round my ankle.

While she was so employed I informed her of my fight with the otter
and the loss of my dog, and her gentle sympathy was sweet to my
troubled spirit. And then I told her where she might find the
otter's skin, and how she should make use of it.

"There, now," she said, putting a pin through the bandage and
rising to her feet, "that will serve till you get home."

"It's real kind of you to do this for me, Thora," I said, touched
by the girl's tenderness, "and I will not forget this. No, not as
long as I live;" and I think there was a tremor in my voice--at
least I felt what I said.

"But," I continued, "what will they say to you at Crua Breck, if
they hear you have done this thing?"

"Halcro, I have done nothing but what I have been told to do.
Before you knocked at the door, my father was saying we should aye
'do as we'd be done by.' In that I have obeyed him. But I must run
back now, or they will miss me. See you give care to the foot. Fare
ye well!"

And with that she hastened back to the farm, leaving me to ponder
over her manner of applying that golden rule which her father had,
while teaching it, so grievously failed to practise.

I made my way onward to Lyndardy--sadly, it is true, but with a
strange new feeling in my heart for this blue-eyed maiden who, in
defiance of her family, had helped me in my weariness and distress.

A short distance from the place where Thora left me, I came to the
ruined cottage of Inganess. As I approached I heard a click-clicking
noise, by which I surmised there was some person within the ruined
walls. A dog came out to meet me at the door, wagging its tail in
welcome. It was the very counterpart of my own dead Selta, and I
knew well whom to expect in the cottage even before I entered.

Seated on the floor under shelter of a part of the roof that had
not fallen in, was an old man, with locks of silver hair appearing
under his blue bonnet, and hanging with a curl about his neck. The
clicking sound I had heard proceeded from a flint and the back of a
knife, with which the old man was endeavouring to strike a light to
kindle the little pile of faded heather that lay in a corner. When
I looked in he raised his eyes and said with surprise:

"Ah! Halcro, lad. Travelling on a day like this? Why, ye're as wet
as myself. But come in, come in here. It's a poor house; but ye're
real welcome. And where's your dog?"

I was downcast at this question, for it was this same old man
before me--this Colin Lothian, the wandering beggar--who had given
Selta to me, and the dog that was with him was Selta's brother.

"Colin," I asked, when I had told him of my dog's death, "why is it
you come to this poor place for shelter when every house in the
Mainland is open to you? Why do you not go to my uncle's at
Lyndardy?"

"Weel, ye see, lad, I dinna mind where I gang. One place is as good
as another, and this is very well in a shower of rain. I was west
at Crua Breck when the rain came on sae heavy; and I hae been here
these twa hours tryin' to strike a light, but ye see the tinder's
wet--

"Try you if ye can do it, lad;" and the old man handed me the
flint.

"Aweel, then," he continued, "I opened the door at Crua Breck, just
as I would open any door in Orkney, be it rich or poor. But wad
they let me in, think ye? Na, na. Carver was sittin' yonder, as he
aye does on the rainy days, when there's nae gettin' aboot the
farm, preachin' away before a bonnie fire. But the auld hypocrite
wouldna let me in. What cares he for the Holy Word? If it werena
for his goodwife, he'd never open the Scriptures. Ay, but it's a
lang while he'll be preachin' any good into yon blackguard son o'
his. There's not a house of harder hearts in all the Mainland than
Crua Breck. They all take after Carver; ilka body o' them, except
peerie Thora."

"Yes," I said feelingly, "Thora's kinder than all the rest."

"Kinder! Ay is she. She's no' like ane o' the same family. I mind
ae stormy night in the last winter, when Carver had shut the door
in my face, Thora cam' after me and, 'Colin,' says she, 'come away
here, and I'll gie ye a bed in the byre;' and with that she took me
in among the kine and gied me some oaten bannocks and a flagon o'
warm milk. And then she made up a bed upon the hay, wi' a good warm
plaid to wrap mysel' in. 'See there, now, Colin,' says she. 'Rest
ye here, and I'll let ye out before my father rises i' the
mornin'.' Now wasna that kindness for ye, Halcro?"

"Ay, Colin, that was just like wee Thora."

Whilst Colin was telling me these things I was busy trying to
kindle the fire; but try as I would, it could not be done.

"Oh, never mind the fire, Colin!" I said. "Just come along wi' me
to my uncle's farm at Lyndardy. Ye'll get good shelter and food
there. That's far better than staying in this ruined place."

So the old man got up on his feet, and we walked together to the
farm.

My sister Jessie, who frequently came up to Lyndardy to stay over
the Sabbath, was in the kitchen when we arrived, and while we were
drying our clothes before the fire she got some good warm broth
ready for us, and some new-made scones.

Over our meal I told Jessie of my adventure with the otter, and the
death of my dog. She wanted to dress my ankle again, but Thora had
bound it up so skilfully that there was nothing more to be done.

"I wonder that the otter should bite you like that, Halcro," Jessie
said. "Why, I thought the old viking's stone was to save ye frae
the like o' that!"

I had myself wondered at the same circumstance.

"Ah! but, Jessie," I said, suddenly comforting myself with an
excuse for the apparent failure of the charm, "Mr. Drever didna
tell me that the stone would be o' any use against such a beast as
an otter."

"No, I ken that. But did he not say it would protect ye from all
harm? Surely an otter shouldna be left out o' the reckoning."

But here Colin Lothian, to whom the virtues of the viking's
talisman had been explained, suggested that I perhaps needed to
have some secret communication with the stone in my own mind--that
I perhaps needed to think of the charm at the very moment of
danger, and to call upon it for aid. He had heard of such things,
he said.

This explanation appeared to me very reasonable, and with the
suggestion in my mind I determined, should I ever have another
opportunity, to put it in practice.

Such an opportunity presented itself sooner than I could have
expected.



Chapter XVIII. The Wreck Of The "Undine."


Colin Lothian remained at Lyndardy until the following Monday
morning. He slept out in the byre, where such wayfarers as he were
always welcome to a supper and a bed, and in the evenings he would
come in to the kitchen to sit with my uncle and talk over the
affairs of the island, or to read us a chapter out of the well-worn
Testament that he carried with him on his wanderings. For Colin was
a religious man and loved his Bible. He knew most of the Psalms by
heart, and often gathered groups of islanders about him to hear him
repeat them. Idlers sometimes scoffed at his fondness for the
epistle on Charity; but no one who heard him repeat it could fail
to be impressed by its teaching or to recognize the poor wanderer's
sincerity.

Colin was the recognized newsmonger of the Mainland, and it was his
habit to travel from parish to parish retailing the gossip of the
countryside. At farm towns which were situated in remote places he
was always a welcome guest. He was well acquainted with the
condition of the markets and the state of the fishing and the
crops. He knew the price of butter and of oatmeal, of cattle and of
sheep, and his information was often of great value to the farmers
in adjusting the values of farm produce. With the old men he would
laugh over the jokes of days that had been; tell them how laird had
gone to law with laird, or how poor crofters had been evicted from
their holdings for failing to pay their taxes or their rents. The
young women were always ready to hear from him who was to be
married at Martinmas, or how Nell So-and-so had been jilted; and he
often entertained the young people with strange tales of the
brownies, the trows, the kelpies, or other supernatural beings. In
this way he supplied the place of newspapers and books, which were
scarce commodities in those old days; and he further made himself
useful by doing odd work about the steadings and cottages--such as
building the peats into stacks for the winter, mending a thatch, or
even doctoring a cow.

On the Sunday evening at Lyndardy, while the storm still beat upon
the land, Colin sat with us round the fireside and smoked with my
uncle Mansie. The talk drifted round to the subject of Carver
Kinlay, whose new boat was to be brought from Kirkwall that week.
My uncle did not know for what purpose that new boat was built.

Kinlay was a man who had no settled occupation outside his farm.
Sometimes, it is true, he went out to the herring fishing when the
fish were plentiful, and he thought he could make some money by it,
and he often made secret passages over to Scotland for no one knew
what trade. But it was for none of these purposes that the new boat
was required, for it had been built with a deep keel and a lugger
rig, with a view to being a quick sailer.

Now if anyone should know of Carver's purpose, it would be Colin
Lothian, and my uncle questioned him on the subject.

"Colin," said he, "they tell me that Carver is gettin' a new boat
frae Kirkwall. D'ye ken what he means to do wi' it?"

"That's piper's news," said Colin. "I heard that three or four
weeks syne; and I hae seen the boat mysel', on the stocks at Allan
Dewar's boatyard. Ay, and a bonnie boat she is! As to what Carver
means to do wi' it--Weel, I dinna ken if it be true; but I hae
heard that he intends to start as a Stromness pilot in opposition
to Sandy Ericson."

"A pilot!" exclaimed Mansie. "Carver Kinlay a pilot! Man, Colin, ye
astonish me. Why, the man hasna gotten a certificate!"

"Maybe ay and maybe no; but I assure ye, Mansie, that a pilot he
means to be."

Mansie dismissed this notion incredulously; for though Kinlay knew
the coast very well, yet the idea of his starting with his limited
experience as an Orkney pilot was droll to one who, like my uncle,
had been all his life at the work, and knew every fathom of the
waters.

But the character of Carver Kinlay--"Crafty Carver" he was called
by those who knew him well--was a problem which had not yet been
solved. I had myself gathered many incoherent hints relating to
him, and, bit by bit, I heard fragments of fact as to his first
appearance in Pomona; but on this Sunday evening, as I sat with
Lothian and Mansie, I added to these hints some certain knowledge
which enabled me afterwards to better understand this man.

The noise of the storm raging outside--the wind and rain beating on
the windows, and the sound of the waves breaking against the
cliffs--brought the two men to talk about the ships that had from
time to time been wrecked on our neighbouring coast. Said Mansie:

"'Twas on a night like this--d'ye mind, Colin?--that the Undine
went to pieces on the Gaulton Craigs."

"Ay," said Colin, "weel do I mind it, and weel, I reckon, does
Carver Kinlay mind it."

The conversation regarding the incident was disjointed. Let me,
therefore, tell the story in my own words.

My father had with his gallant crew gone out to sea one stormy
night in the pilot boat. A stiff westerly wind was blowing, and the
headland of Hoy was hidden in mist and spray. The Curlew was
steered out into the open sea in the hope of falling in with any
ship that required piloting into the safe haven of Stromness.
Beaten about on the heavy sea, the boat was brought along the outer
coast of Pomona until she stood off abreast of the Head of Marwick.
Along the coastline of Sandwick, as she sailed back towards
Stromness, the waves rose in angry foam against the rugged cliffs.
None but men thoroughly accustomed to the terrors of the
storm-swept Orkneys could have taken that little craft through such
a surging sea, and it was only by the help of the light that was
always kept aglow in the windows of Lyndardy farmhouse that they
were able to guide the boat in safety.

When the Curlew was abreast of Inganess, Willie Slater, the lookout
man at the bow, reported a ship in sight; and as my uncle Mansie
lighted a rude torch, made of old rope steeped in the oil of sea
birds, my father peered into the darkness and saw a large barque
heading towards the land. The blazing light of the torch was
presently waved as a warning signal to those on the ship.

The meaning of this was understood too late, for before the vessel
could turn she was driven swiftly upon the North Gaulton rocks, and
there smashed like a bottle of glass.

Then the sail of the Curlew was lowered, and the boat taken as
close as possible to the wrecked ship. The cries of the people on
board were heard in the tempest, but there was little hope of
saving life. Yet the pilot crew were undaunted by any risks. Four
of the men were at the oars; Mansie was at the bow with his flaming
torch, and my father at the tiller. They got within hail of the
ship, and after an infinite amount of trouble succeeded in saving
four precious lives. These four persons were a seaman, a gentleman
passenger--who was picked up suffering from a wound he had received
in the head when the vessel struck--Mrs. Kinlay, and my
schoolfellow, Tom Kinlay.

When they were brought into the boat, Mrs. Kinlay entreated my
father not to leave the wreck until he had saved her husband and
her infant girl. But after much searching of the water the chance
of saving any more lives was so small, and the danger to the Curlew
so great, that the boat was brought to the beach at Inganess Geo,
where its suffering passengers were landed and carried up to the
neighbouring farm of Crua Breck.

The Curlew was then taken back to the wrecked barque. One of the
ship's boats had been launched by the skipper and some of the crew,
who had endeavoured to save all they could; but the little craft
was too frail to stand against the heavy sea; it was dashed against
the sunken rocks and all were drowned. My father and his men
remained by the vessel until daylight. Among the jagged rocks, when
the tide went down, they found the body of a very beautiful woman
with the shattered body of a child still clasped in her arms. The
infant seemed to have been hurriedly taken from its bed. This fair
lady was afterwards recognised as the wife of the owner of the
ill-fated vessel--the gentleman my father had rescued--who had
been returning with her and their infant daughter to Denmark. The
lady's name was Thora Quendale, and it was her tomb that I had seen
in the old graveyard of Bigging on that evening when we shared the
viking's treasures.

Her husband had remained in Orkney only until he had laid her and
the child to rest, when, gathering the few remnants of his property
that remained to him from the wreck of his ship, he took a passage
in a vessel that happened to touch at Kirkwall for repairs, and
with the sailor who had been saved with him he set sail for
Denmark. My uncle Mansie said that this Mr. Quendale had promised
to my father and others that he would be back again in Pomona in a
few months, but since that time he had never been heard of.

Now it happened that on the fifth day after the wreck of the Undine
(for such was the vessel's name) my father was taking his small
boat round to Borwick, a little hamlet two miles south of Skaill
Bay. On passing the place where the vessel struck, now calm and
peaceful after the storm, he shortened sail and rowed inshore. A
little distance up the face of the red cliff, above the high-water
mark, and hidden by a projecting rock, there was a "scurro," or
fissure, which opened into a large cavern. He had discovered this
cavern when he was a boy, on some bird-nesting expedition; and now,
scarcely knowing why he did so--except, perhaps, for the passing
thought that some of the wreckage had been washed into it by the
high waves--he climbed up from his boat and entered the cave. To
his astonishment he found there a half-starved man, who had been on
board the Undine at the time of the disaster. Having found the cave
in his endeavours to scale the cliff, this unfortunate man had
contrived to live there during the five long days and nights since
the wreck by subsisting on shellfish, seaweed, and a few sea-birds'
eggs.

What surprised my father more than all, however, was that the man
had as a companion a helpless little child. Someone on the ship had
placed the infant in an empty packing case, which had drifted into
the cave. The pilot conveyed the two waifs ashore and took them up
to Crua Breck.

The man thus rescued by my father was Carver Kinlay; the little
child was Thora.

All that I could learn from my uncle and old Colin concerning
Carver, further than this, was that he was a native of the north of
Scotland, and that he and his family were passengers on the Danish
ship, which was to have put in at the haven of Wick, in Caithness.
Careless where he settled down, however, when cast upon the shores
of Pomona, he had taken root here, like a weed in a flower garden.
He seemed to have had a store of money in the big chest which he
claimed from among the wreckage, and circumstances enabled him to
purchase the little farm of Crua Breck, together with a fishing
boat. The fishing, and a previous knowledge of the Orkney channels,
had given him some experience of local navigation; and it was upon
the strength of this experience that, having built his pilot boat,
he intended to start in opposition to my father.

The greater part of what Mansie and Colin said, as they sat in the
comfortable kitchen of Lyndardy, was entirely new to me. I felt a
strange pleasure in hearing now, for the first time, that Thora
Kinlay owed her life, in some sort, to my own father. When he
carried the little girl up to the farm, with a seaman's jacket
covering her from the cold--for the women and children had all been
in their beds when the ship struck--she was at once claimed by Mrs.
Kinlay. They named her Thora, after Mrs. Quendale, who had shown
some kindness to her during the voyage, by reason of a resemblance
that existed between the two children--Mrs. Quendale's own child
and the child of Mrs. Kinlay--both of whom were of a like age.

The story of the wreck of the Undine gave me many matters to ponder
over. But the one practical thing that I learnt was this existence
of a cave in the North Gaulton cliffs. I had not known that there
was such a cave at that spot, although, indeed, I prided myself
upon my knowledge of the whole coastline from Rora to Birsay. I
accordingly determined to explore the cliff at some future time.



Chapter XIX. Tom Kinlay's Bargain.


I must not omit to mention that Willie Hercus and Robbie Rosson
duly delivered up to Mr. Drever their shares of Jarl Haffling's
treasure. The dominie was, I believed, already in communication
with the proper authorities concerning the claims that would be
imposed according to what he called the law of treasure trove. But
there were many delays in coming to an agreement, owing, as I
understood, to official indifference and to the difficulty of
determining the value of the relics, which Mr. Drever contended
were worth more than their mere weight in silver. Meanwhile, the
schoolmaster, anxious to keep the collection, as he said, intacto,
for preservation in some museum, still held possession of the
antiquities, and was nightly burning much oil in his absorbed study
of them.

Since Tom Kinlay had left the school Mr. Drever had not seen him.
But, betimes, a message was sent by Thora to intimate to Tom that
we others had given our parts of the viking's treasure into his
charge, and advising that Tom should send in the remainder without
delay. But Tom, who now owed no direct duty to the dominie,
resolutely refused to give up his share of the treasure.

On a windy Saturday morning--a week after the death of my poor
dog--I was loitering about the quays in the port, when I was
attracted towards a little crowd that had gathered round an old
capstan. The crowd consisted of several sailors and fishermen, with
a sprinkling of townsfolk, who were evidently much interested in
something that was going on in their midst.

I walked towards them and elbowed my way in beside old Davie Flett,
the skipper of a coasting schooner, with whom I was slightly
acquainted.

"What's all the stir, Mr. Flett?" I asked.

"Och, it's just an auld Jew doing some business," he replied; and I
pressed my way further into the crowd.

In the middle of the group there was a withered little man, bent
with age, with a long ragged beard and a nose like the beak of a
hawk. He wore a great black coat that was very shiny and reached
almost down to his ankles; and in his skinny fingers he held what I
soon recognized as the large red stone that Tom Kinlay had found at
Skaill. Tom himself was standing near the old Jew, and bargaining
with him for all the treasure that had fallen to his share.

The Jew had made some offer for the gem when I came up, and Kinlay
was deliberating whilst listening to the advice of the fishermen.

"Take his offer, lad," advised Jack Munroe.

"Ay, take it, Tommy," added another. "Ye'll mebbe never hae anither
such chance again."

"Nay, dinna be a fule," said Jim London. "The auld swindler kens
the thing's worth mair than he offers. Gar him gie ye anither ten
shillings."

"No, no," protested the Jew, speaking in broken English. "I not
want ze ting. Wot use I make of it?"

He was about to hand it back to Tom.

"Well, well," he continued, again examining the gem. "If you not
satisfy, den I gif you six shilling more; wot you say, eh? Dat make
ten pound and six shilling, English. It not worth one penny more, I
tell you."

"Mike it ten guineas," urged Kinlay.

"What! ten guineas? Himmel, mine child, you make me ruined!"
exclaimed the Jew.

"Give the lad the ten guineas and be done with it, Isaac," said a
young seaman who appeared to know him. "You'll get your own price
in Amsterdam."

"Well, ten guineas I will gif--two hundred and ten shilling!"

And the old Jew slowly counted out the money from a dirty canvas
bag that he took from his belt. I saw his little black eyes glitter
as he dropped the sparkling gem into the bag and buttoned up his
coat, before handing over the money.

Kinlay pocketed the sovereigns, and then looked round the crowd of
faces about him with an air of extreme satisfaction. At the same
time old Isaac turned to a Dutch sailor who was addressing him in
their own language. By the fox-like look in the Jew's eyes I
understood that he, on his part, was not really discontented with
the bargain he had closed.

But Tom had evidently not disposed of all his valuables, for, just
as Isaac was slipping away, he held him by the sleeve and showed
him a handful of the viking's coins and rings, whereupon the old
Hebrew renewed his bartering, with the result that Tom disposed of
all his remaining store for the sum of two additional pounds.

The crowd was breaking up, and the Jew again slipping away, when I
called out to him, thinking I would tell him that there were some
more of these things in Stromness, and believing for the moment
that Mr. Drever might have some wish to deal with so generous a
purchaser. Isaac could at least tell him what the treasure was
worth, I reflected.

"Will ye buy any more o' these things?" I asked, when he came to my
side.

"Well, I want nossing more, mine young friend," he replied. "I haf
make a very bad bargain already. But what have you? Any more of
dose pretty tings?" and he indicated the gem that he had bought
from Kinlay.

I thought at once of my magic stone that was suspended at my neck
under my guernsey. I produced it, though of course I did not mean
to let him have it at any price.

"Is this worth anything?" I asked.

But I had no sooner brought it forth than I felt a tugging at my
sleeve. I turned round and saw old Davie Flett frowning at me
meaningly.

"Don't have anything to do wi' the auld thief!" he whispered,
dragging me aside. "Come away, lad, an' let me tell ye something."

But the Jew was already examining my little black stone, and asking
me to take the cord that held it off my neck. He scratched its
smooth surface with his long finger nails, and then took out an old
knife from his pocket and was proceeding to insert the blade under
the gold ring that encircled the stone. I snatched my precious
talisman from him, and replaced it under the collar of my knitted
shirt. The Jew looked surprised; but without heeding him I turned
away with Captain Flett, who walked with me some distance from the
dispersing crowd.

When we were alone beside one of the sheds he said:

"It's all right now, Ericson, my lad. I wanted but to save ye frae
makin' a fule o' yersel, like Carver Kinlay's lad."

"Why," I said, "Kinlay has made a very good bargain, has he not?"

"Simpleton!" said the skipper. "Ye didna hear what yon Dutch sailor
said to the auld Jew, eh?"

"I heard, captain, but of course I didna understand," I said.

"Weel, my lad, I understood," said he. "The Dutchman asked him what
kind o' gem it was he had gotten frae the boy.

"'It's a ruby,' said the Jew.

"'Oho!'said the Dutchman. 'It's a rare big one, though. How muckle
might ye be expectin' to get for it across the water--a couple o'
hundred?'

"Then the auld Jew gave the Dutchman a wink, and said, 'Maybe a
thousand dollars, mynheer.'

"So ye see, Ericson, if the auld swindler could count upon gettin',
let us say, two hundred pounds English for the stone over in
Amsterdam, ye can hardly say that young Kinlay got a big price
for't, can ye?"

I was astounded at this information. Such unfairness appeared to my
boyish mind as criminal in the extreme. But a wider knowledge of
the world has since taught me that in commercial transactions
things are not always bought and sold at their proper value.

I thanked my skipper friend, while telling him that I had myself
had no intention of dealing with the merchant.

Scarcely had I left Mr. Flett two minutes before I heard someone
walking hurriedly behind me. I was quickly overtaken by old Isaac
and Tom Kinlay.

"Ericson," said Tom with a friendly tone in his voice, as though we
had never quarrelled. "Let the old man hae a sight o' that thing
ye've got round yer neck, will ye?"

I put my hands in my trousers pockets, and made no reply.

"I gif you tree shilling for it," said the Jew.

"Keep your dirty money, sir," I said, turning on my heel.

Then, as though he did not wish Kinlay to overhear his offer, he
followed me, taking me by the sleeve:

"Ah! mine friend," he said coaxingly, "I see you know wot it is.
Very well, den, I gif you a sovereign."

"A sovereign!" I exclaimed aloud.

And Kinlay, who had now come up to us, opened his eyes in surprise.

"Take the money, man," he urged.

"Nay, nay," I said. "If you like to give the value of two hundred
pounds in exchange for ten guineas, I am certainly not so green.
Besides, ye ken weel enough that those things were not rightly
yours. Mr. Drever has told you that."

He did not appear to notice the latter part of what I said.

"Two hundred pounds!" he exclaimed, looking from me to the Jew.
"Two hundred pounds! What d'ye mean?"

"I mean," I said calmly, "that you have been swindled. It's a ruby
stone ye hae sold him, a ruby worth two hundred pounds."

I will not soon forget the expression that came into Tom's eyes
when he heard this. It was a look first of incredulity, as though
he supposed I was simply playing upon him. Then it changed to a
look of defeat as he realized how much he had been cheated by the
crafty old Jew. He turned round to vent his indignation upon Isaac,
swearing and uttering threats of vengeance.

"Ye auld long-nosed deevil!" he exclaimed. "Ye heathen swindler!
Gie me back the stone!"

But Isaac had already slipped away from the spot like a startled
trout. We saw his long coattails disappear round the corner of an
alley that led down to the harbour. Kinlay followed him, still
swearing and threatening, and got down to the quay just in time to
see the old Jew jump into a boat that had been waiting for him. The
boat belonged to a Dutch brig that was putting out to sea, and when
old Isaac got aboard, the anchor was already at the cat head and
the sails were bellying in the wind.

Frustrated in his revenge upon the Jew, Kinlay now turned upon me
his indignation. He accused me of willingly allowing him to sell
the ruby below its value. I simply told him that it was no business
of mine, and quietly asked him where he had got the gem.

"But I needna ask you that," I added, "for I well ken where you got
it."

"Where did I get it?" he inquired, his face turning as red as the
ruby itself.

"You got it from the old viking's helmet," I replied, "for I saw
you put the thing in your pocket, though you did deny that you had
it that day over at Skaill. But ye'll see what Mr. Drever will say
to your selling what didna rightly belong to you."

"I carena that for Mr. Drever," he said, snapping his fingers. "Nor
for you neither, ye young sneak."

At this he turned from me without further words. But I think there
was more malice against me in his heart than he allowed to appear
on the surface. This incident, and my advantage over him, had at
least the effect of increasing the enmity between us.



Chapter XX. The Opposition Boat.


The little haven of Stromness was ever a quiet place, but never did
it seem so quiet as during the calm which succeeded the storm of
the past week, especially as that calm came on a Sunday, that
quietest of all days in the North. Even the twittering of the
sparrows on the quaint housetops seemed less noisy than usual, and
the women who stood in groups in the narrow street, with their
clean mutch caps, their crimson hubbie jackets and coarse blue
gowns, suppressed their voices almost into whispers as they talked
of the growing quarrel between my father and his new rival, Carver
Kinlay. The solemn stillness of the June Sabbath was everywhere
apparent. The healthy scent of the peat smoke, mingled with a
certain fishy odour, permeated the little town, while the cool,
fresh smell of the seaweed, and the sweet perfume of the Dutch
clover, came from the shores of the bay. The few men who were in
port lounged about in sight of the sea, looking lazily outward at
the anchored ships.

On the little jetty at the Anchor Close my father sat on an
upturned herring creel, smoking his pipe, and watching a flock of
sea mews floating gracefully on the green water. Occasionally these
birds would rise in the sunny air with long outstretched wings, and
give utterance to cries not unlike the mewing of kittens. Some
wind-bound vessels lay at anchor in their own reflections, keel to
keel, with gay colours streaming from their mastheads. I had never
before seen the bay looking so still and beautiful. But from the
outer shores of the Ness came the prolonged murmur of the Atlantic
waves, falling upon the ear like an everlasting sigh.

I was seated in the stern of the Curlew, as the boat lay against
the pier upon which my father sat smoking. Looking over her side
down into the clear water, I could see the small fish dart about
like flashes of silver light in the emerald depths, where the
many-coloured seaweeds swayed softly to and fro with the motion of
the tide; while far below, on their sandy bed, the bright shells,
the sea urchins, and the green mossy stones gleamed like brilliant
gems. And the low swish of the tide against the stone pier made a
pleasant, sleepy sound.

Sometimes, as I sat there dreamily, my eyes would wander across the
smooth blue water to the distant hills, following the steady,
swooping flight of an eagle. Nearer at hand, the flight of a flock
of sea larks along the links of the shore would attract my
attention, while once I heard the splash of a solan goose diving in
the bay, and saw the spray rise in a glittering column high above
the water.

Suddenly my dreamy meditations were interrupted. Hurried footsteps
sounded in the silent street, and looking up the passage of the
Anchor Close I saw a company of men quickly passing. Among them
were Carver Kinlay and his son Tom.

I told my father who they were, at which he expressed much wonder,
and tried to assign a cause for their hurrying. But soon our
questioning was fully answered by the unexpected appearance of my
sister Jessie.

"Father!" said she, very much out of breath, for she had walked
very quickly from Lyndardy, where she had been staying during the
whole of that past week.

"Well, lass?" said my father, looking round at the girl's agitated
face. "What have you seen that you look so scared?"

"I've seen from the cliffs," gasped Jessie. "I've seen the Lydia
makin' for Stromness. She has surely put back, for her masts are
away, and her bulwarks are wrecked."

"The Lydia! What, Captain Gordon's ship? Ay, lass, but ye're
telling me a strange thing. You'd better gang and tell Mansie to
get the men out. There'll be a race wi' the new pilot, I'm
thinking."

And he knocked the ashes from his pipe, and came down into the boat
to get her ready.

Jessie, however, had no need to go and tell the crew to get ready,
for she had hardly turned away when my uncle Mansie and the men
hurried down the jetty and sprang into the Curlew.

The day was so fine and bright that my heart yearned for a sail in
the boat, and I was about to ask my father if I might go out with
him, when he forestalled me by ordering me to be seated among the
ropes in the bow.

The quietude of the Sabbath was now changed to bustle and
excitement. The oars and rowlocks were put in place, the sail made
ready for hoisting, and soon all was trim and ready to start.

My father's pilot boat, the Curlew, was strongly built and of great
breadth of beam. It was of a pattern and rig peculiar to the
Orkneys, much after the fashion of a whaling boat, and called a
"sixter," from having a crew of six men. It was propelled by either
sail or oars, as either was most convenient, but the Orcadian
boatmen never employed the oars when the sail could be used.

The boat's crew was a picked one, and seldom could six finer men be
seen together. The skipper, my father, was himself a picture of
manly strength, handsome and agile. His father and grandfather had
been pilots; the latter, indeed, had been the chief pilot of
Stromness in the year 1780, when Captain Cook's ships, the
Discovery and the Resolution, lay in the harbour on their return
from the South Seas.

My father's shipmates, as he called them, were also fine stalwart
men, each of them competent to take the skipper's place, but each
willing to sacrifice anything for Sandy Ericson. My uncle Mansie
was mate, and sat forward in the bow. The stroke oar was usually
taken by Tom Hercus, a man of singular daring. Willie Slater was an
old whaler, who could stand any hardships with perfect indifference.
Then there was Jock Eunson, a good-humoured Orphir man, who, on many
a dark night, had kept his mates merry as they beat about in the
outer sea in search of ships; and Ringan Storlsen, of Finstown, who
had been at school with my father, and with whom he had had many an
adventure.

"Hurry along, my lads; there's Kinlay started," said my father,
seating himself in the stern sheets.

With that the ropes were cast off and the sail hoisted. Then the
boat was pushed off from the pier, and as she caught the light
breeze she glided slowly into the bay among the sailing shadows of
the summer clouds.

When we were out in the deep water I looked along the line of the
shore for the opposition boat; but I found she was already further
out than ourselves, looking like a pleasure yacht, with her newly
painted hull and clean white canvas--a contrast to the dingy brown
sail and the scratched and worn hull of the Curlew.

My uncle Mansie, who sat quite near to me, told me that the new
boat was called the St. Magnus--after the patron saint of
Orkney--and I noticed that he spoke very lightly of her as a
sailer. I asked him if he did not think she would beat us in this
race; but he assured me there was no fear of it, for that though
Kinlay had the start of us, yet he had not the advantage of a well
trained and disciplined crew, and his ropes were too new to run
free.

There was little chance of a race, however, in the calm bay, and my
uncle, not wishing Kinlay to see that we were taking any interest
in his movements, drew my attention away from the St. Magnus by
asking me some questions about my viking's stone. He said that, now
I had made a start in coming out in the boat, I might stand a
better chance of proving the virtue of my talisman, more especially
if I should be bold enough to come out on some dark, stormy night,
when there would be some danger. Then some of the other men,
hearing us, asked me to show them the magic stone, and it went
round the whole company for inspection.

By the time they had all had a good look at it, and I had hung it
round my neck again, we had got full into the breeze of the outer
bay. My father, who held the tiller, managed to get to the weather
side of the St. Magnus, and when we reached the Ness point, where a
number of people had already gathered from the town to watch the
expected race, the two boats were bow to bow.

Beyond the point we brought up at the same moment as the St.
Magnus, and steered westward on the starboard tack, with a
southwesterly breeze swelling our sails. The Curlew now bent over
to leeward, our bow plunging into the waves, dashing them aside and
sending the foam surging in a long track far astern. With a strong
outrunning current in our favour we sped through the channel
between Stromness and Graemsay, the St. Magnus being now to
windward of us and several lengths behind.

Tom Kinlay was sitting on the weather gunwale near his father, who
was steering. It was easy to see that they were all suppressing
their excitement in the race; yet their craft was brought bravely
along in our track, and there was still a chance of their reaching
the ship before us. The result depended upon good steering, and
upon the readiness of each crew to lower sail at the right moment.

From watching the St. Magnus I turned my attention to the
approaching barque, which, by her green-painted hull, I soon enough
recognized as the Lydia. She was struggling slowly onward against
the rapids of Hoy Sound, with the wind on her starboard quarter,
and as we got nearer her I could see the extent of the damage she
had sustained in the late storm. She had lost her fore and main
topgallant masts, and her port bulwarks were stove in. The quarter
boat was missing and her jolly boat was gone.

She came along at the rate of about two knots, under close-reefed
topsails, storm trysails, and spanker. We could hear Captain
Gordon's voice directing the working of the ship, and once I saw
him on the quarterdeck, leaning over the rail to watch us. His head
was bandaged as if from some accident. On the forecastle deck the
mate and some men stood watching our approach, with ropes ready to
throw out to us.

I became inwardly excited when the moment came that was to
determine everything; and even my father was a little pale as he
steered us steadily towards the lee side of the Lydia. We came
within a hundred yards of her when he cried out, "Lower away!" and
I heard the same order given on the St. Magnus.

Down came our sail in quick obedience, and at the same time oars
were put out to prevent the strong stream and the way we had on us
from sweeping us past the vessel.

The Lydia was now in a most dangerous part of the channel, where
the rapid tide was met by the equally rapid stream of Burra Sound
from the south side of Graemsay island. They formed a wide, swift
current of broken water, which swirled and eddied about with a
rough irregular motion. As our boat passed the bowsprit of the
Lydia, my father turned her head towards the ship, and my uncle
Mansie was alert and ready to catch the coil of rope that was at
that moment thrown down to us from the barque's forecastle.

I think the rope was awkwardly thrown, or the man throwing it had
miscalculated the rate at which we were driving past. Howbeit, the
rope fell across our stern, beyond Mansie's reach. Leaving the
tiller my father seized it with the intention of passing it forward
to my uncle, holding the coil in one hand and the line in the
other. As he rose from his seat, however, the rope was by some
stupid mistake suddenly made secure on board the ship instead of
being paid out, and my father was instantly jerked into the sea.

"Let go the rope!" Tom Hercus shouted to my father.

But the seaman in charge of the line on the ship's deck, taking the
order as meant for himself, cast off the rope, the end of which
dropped overboard before the error was discovered. Thus the rope my
father held was fastened neither to the ship nor to the boat. He
was a powerful swimmer, but he soon became entangled in the coil of
rope in such a manner that the more he struggled to free himself
the worse became the tangle, so that his very efforts to swim made
his position more difficult than if he had remained still.

This could all be seen from the Lydia, and ropes and life buoys,
which he failed to catch, were thrown to him as he rose for a
moment to the surface and finally disappeared.

Now this unhappy incident threw us all into such confusion and
consternation aboard the Curlew, dividing our men's attention
between attempting to reach the drowning skipper and endeavouring
to secure another rope thrown from the ship, that all control of
the boat was lost. The Curlew was capsized by the treacherous
current, and we were all engulfed without a moment's warning.

An awful exclamation of "Oh, God!" was the last thing I heard as I
sank below the waves, and then the water rushed into my open mouth,
and I felt my cap torn from my head. Down, down I sank, struggling,
yet with my eyes open, while the water became dark around me and I
was drawn along by the whirling undercurrent.

I raised my hands above my head and tried to regain the surface and
get breath; but it was many moments before my eyes were gladdened
at seeing the water grow greener and brighter. Then I could see the
sunlight above me glancing and dancing in the surrounding water;
then at last I felt that my hands had reached the surface, my head
rose up into the open air, where I gasped and got breath. I swam
about for a little, thinking only of keeping myself above water,
but when I got my full breath again and found that I could keep
afloat without great effort, I looked around me and remembered what
had happened.

There was the ship, the Lydia, lying athwart the channel, ten
fathoms or so away from me, and I could see the St. Magnus beating
down towards me. I looked for my father and my uncle Mansie and the
other men, but could see none of them anywhere. Probably my own
lightness, and the fact that I was not, like them, encumbered with
heavy sea boots, had aided me in coming up to the surface before
them. But I could not have helped them, even had they stood in need
of such help as mine, and I knew that they were all good swimmers,
so I turned round on my breast with the current and continued
swimming towards the Curlew, which now floated, bottom up, to the
seaward side of me.

The St. Magnus very soon came within hail, drifting with the rapid
stream. The men were at the oars, though they only used them to
steady the boat and hold her back.

Just as they were abreast of me the man at the bow cried out,
"There's old Slater! Port your helm!" and the boat's head was
turned away from my direction, for they had not seen me.

As she slewed round, however, Tom Kinlay. who sat at the stern,
caught sight of me swimming close under the boat's side. So near to
him was I, indeed, that by stretching out his arm he might have
caught my upraised hand. Our eyes met, and a smile of triumph
played about his lips. The boat was rowed away from me without his
uttering a word or once attempting to save me.

I kept steadily on my way, swimming towards the Curlew, nor did I
once look round again for the St. Magnus.

The upturned boat was floating outward with the stream, and it took
me a very long time and a strong swim, that tired my arms more than
I can say, before I could be sure that I was shortening the
distance that separated me from this one refuge. But at last the
boat got into a whirling eddy that turned her round and round, and
so kept her back until I was within a fathom of her. Yet even this
short distance seemed more than I could now swim, for, with my
clothes on and my jacket buttoned over me, my arms were not free
enough to let me swim with any ease, and I began to despair and to
flounder about in such eagerness to reach the boat, that I sank
twice under the waves and got my mouth filled with the briny water.

In my growing fear, however, I thought of the viking's stone that
hung under my waistcoat. Surely now was a time to test its power, I
thought, and the thought gave me courage. Renewing my efforts, I at
length reached the boat and grasped the rudder. But the rudder came
away in my hand, having been displaced in the capsizing of the
boat. This, however, aided me in keeping afloat till I was enabled
to reach the boat again and cling to the keel.

Now was I in comparative safety, for I did not doubt that Carver
Kinlay would see me and bear down to rescue me.

When, after many failures, I managed to climb up the side of the
boat and get astride of her keel, I began to feel sick with the sea
water I had swallowed and weak after my long swim. Then my head
grew dizzy, a mist came over my eyes, and I fainted away.



Chapter XXI. The Rescue.


When I returned to consciousness the warm sunlight was slanting
down upon me. I opened my eyes and saw the snowy clouds floating in
the blue sky. I thought I had but fallen asleep in the stern of the
Curlew as she lay against the jetty on that Sabbath afternoon.

I felt the boat rising and falling gently on the tide. All was
quiet, except for the swishing of the water against the planks of
the boat.

I tried to speak:

"Father," I said, thinking he was there on the jetty smoking.

Then I felt a hand laid gently on my breast and a shadow crossed
between me and the sun.

"He is waking!" said a voice that sounded as sweet as the song of
the skylark to my ears: "Halcro! Halcro!"

A soft hand raised my head, and then I saw, looking down into my
eyes, a beautiful face, framed in a mass of waving hair that the
sunlight had turned into brightest gold. It was the face of Thora
Kinlay.

How Thora came to be there, leaning over me, I could not tell. My
mind was in a strange confusion, and I remembered nothing of what I
had gone through. But soon I heard another voice speaking to me. It
was the voice of my sister Jessie.

"Halcro! Halcro!" it murmured.

"Where am I?" I asked; for I could not understand how I came to be
lying in the bottom of a little sailing boat with my limbs all
aching and trembling.

And Jessie and Thora were at my side--Jessie steering, and Thora
holding the rope of the little lug sail. How did it all come about?

Then Jessie, bidding me lie still, told me in a few words how she
and Thora had watched the race between the Curlew and the St.
Magnus, standing on the high ground of the Ness point. They had
seen the accident, and had immediately put out together in a little
boat that was lying on the beach. They had rescued me from the
upturned Curlew, where I lay in a faint, and were now making for
the Lydia.

"Have they saved father?" I asked.

But the girls did not know. They had not seen anyone picked up by
the St. Magnus.

"Where is Carver's boat now?" I inquired; and feeling my strength
return to me somewhat, I raised myself up and sat on the seat at
the stern beside my sister, while Thora went forward to the mast to
be in readiness to lower the sail.

We were now, as I could see, only a few fathoms distant from the
Lydia, which was lying athwart the stream, thus breaking the force
of the current, and making it possible for us to draw up alongside.
The St. Magnus was already there, having, as I afterwards found,
given up the search for the unfortunate crew of the Curlew. Carver
Kinlay was aboard on the quarterdeck engaged in an altercation with
the skipper, who stood at the gangway.

"Heave us a rope, captain!" cried out Jessie; and Thora caught the
line that was thrown down, while I helped her to draw our boat to
the ship's side.

My clothes were still very wet in spite of the warm sun; but, with
some difficulty, I got up the barque's side and joined Captain
Gordon at the gangway.

"Have any of our men been saved?" I asked. "My father, is he--?"

But I saw by the skipper's downcast face that the worst had
happened. I turned to Kinlay:

"Did you not pick up any of them?" I inquired.

"It was no use," said he sullenly. "We could save none of them."

"You might very well have done so if you'd been more prompt," said
Captain Gordon. "I saw two of the poor men above water when you
turned to come back."

"Why did ye not send out a boat yerself, then?" said Kinlay.

"Because I have none, except the lifeboat there. We lost the others
in the storm. But it was little use my thinking of launching a
heavy lifeboat when you were afloat there at hand."

"Well, well, it couldn't be helped," said Kinlay. "It was their own
fault they were capsized, and there's no use talking. Put your helm
to starboard, skipper, and let's get you into port."

"Is this man a pilot, Ericson?" asked Captain Gordon, turning to
me.

"No," I said; "I believe he has not yet taken out his license. He
started piloting two days since in opposition to my father."

Kinlay scowled almost savagely at me for saying this. But I knew
very well that he was not a fully qualified pilot, whatever he
might become, now that my father was drowned. He lost much of his
swaggering manner, however, and was very quiet when Captain Gordon
ordered him off the ship.

"Since that is so, then," said the captain, "you may leave this
ship, and young Ericson will take us into the harbour. The lad may
have no more claim to pilot us than yourself, but I doubt not he is
quite as capable."

Kinlay walked across the quarterdeck at this dismissal, but as he
put one leg over the gangway to get down to his boat, he said in a
hoarse voice, and with a sly leer in his dark eye:

"I say, skipper, if ye're examined by the authorities, just say you
gave every assistance--that ye hove ropes over--d'ye see? It's a
very lamentable thing. But it was their own faults, their own
faults."

"What d'ye mean?" said the captain. "I did heave ropes over, and I
need tell no lies about it. I gave more assistance than you did, ye
blackguard."

"Oh, very well, very well! I thought I'd just put you on your
guard, d'ye see, in case you're examined."

And so saying, Kinlay disappeared over the rail, and was soon
sailing away, taking Thora with him.

My sister Jessie had come aboard while Carver and the captain were
altercating. She came up to the captain and in great distress asked
him if he was sure no more could be done to find our father and the
other men; at which he expressed his belief that it was impossible
to do anything further. I must add that this was also my own
impression, for I well knew that as the poor fellows had been
unable to keep afloat until Kinlay came up to them, nothing could
now save them from that terrible current.

But already we could see that there were several boats out looking
for the men. They could do more than we, for in the meantime the
Lydia was herself running into some danger, drifting outward with
the current.

I spent no time in expressions of regret or lamentation over the
calamity that had befallen the men of the Curlew; but, feeling that
it was in some measure my duty to undertake the work my father had
set out to perform, I told Captain Gordon the best course to take
to cheat the tide, and gave him such advice as only a person
acquainted with Hoy Sound could possibly give. Under these
directions the barque was guided through the easiest channels into
the smooth water inside the Holms, where the anchor was dropped and
the vessel secured.

Captain Gordon, who had been very kind to me during all this time,
procured me a can of hot coffee to send away my chill. He then
threw a warm pea jacket over my trembling shoulders, and came
ashore with us in the small boat that Jessie and Thora had taken
the use of. He also accompanied us to our home to break the sad
news to our mother--a mission in which he showed a fine tenderness
and sympathy of heart.



Chapter XXII. After The Accident.


The sad catastrophe in Hoy Sound cast a gloom over the little town
of Stromness, where the unfortunate men had been held in great
respect. By the fishers and sailors of the island Sandy Ericson had
been regarded as a sort of chief. When any ship touched at the port
it was his genial face that was first seen, and when they passed on
their long voyages to distant lands it was he who gave the last
word of farewell. Among the women he had been esteemed as an
oracle, to whom they went for comfort in stormy weather when in
doubt as to the fate of lovers or husbands at the fishing; and even
the young children had learned to know his heavy stride, and to run
into the street when he approached, that they might cling to his
great, gentle hand and hear his kind, cheery voice.

The accident had been seen by a large number of women who had
gathered on the Lookout Hill, where they were wont to assemble in
rough weather when watching for the return of the fishing smacks.
When the Curlew was seen to capsize a loud shriek rent the air, for
all knew that to be cast into that dreadful tideway meant almost
certain death. The impulse of my sister Jessie and Thora to put out
in a small boat that lay at the water's edge, on the possible
chance of saving some of us, was, therefore, looked upon as a mad
freak. But when the two girls were seen to rescue me from the
upturned boat, they were praised for their promptitude.

My own rescue, however, was much marvelled at. I had been known as
a good swimmer; but that was not extraordinary in a place where
swimming and cliff climbing were learnt before the alphabet. What
was wondered at was that I had managed to keep afloat and swim so
far when all the men had perished. When it was whispered about,
therefore, that I was in possession of a magic stone which had the
power of protecting me from the dangers of the deep, the credulous
people readily grasped at the explanation of supernatural
assistance, and thenceforth I was distinguished amongst them as one
over whom Providence had cast a miraculous garment to protect me,
as Earl Ewan was protected in the olden time.

But if by the people of Stromness generally the calamity was
lamented over, how much keener was the grief of those who had been
bereft of husbands, fathers, brothers! All the men of the Curlew
were married and had families, with the exception of my uncle
Mansie. But in Mansie's death my mother had to mourn the loss of a
brother in addition to the loss of her husband.

In our house in the Anchor Close, where the crew had so often sat
in readiness to put out the boat, all was now hushed, and the busy
life of my mother and Jessie was suddenly checked and deprived of
all hope, their domestic duties robbed of all meaning. My mother
wandered about the house in melancholy, or sat before the fire
expressing her woe in long-drawn sighs. Very often she walked down
the jetty and looked out across the breezy bay, as though she
expected to see the Curlew coming in, and then she would return
with tears filling her eyes, and take up her knitting to hide her
grief in work, forgetting for the moment that the stockings she was
making were for him who would never, never wear them.

As for myself, my life seemed empty of ambition, now that the
Curlew was sunk and my father and the men had gone. I had learnt to
hope that I might be a pilot some day; but where were my prospects
now? That I must go out to some work was evident, but what was to
be the nature of that work was left to more mature consideration,
or to some happy chance or opportunity. In the meantime I was to
remain away from school.

There was no lack of sympathy for us on the part of our neighbours
for many days after the accident. Mr. Moir, the minister, was among
the first who called, bringing much comfort to my poor widowed
mother; the schoolmaster also came, with great sorrow on his face,
and many a good word he spoke of my father; while Captain Gordon
visited us again and again so long as his ship lay in port.



Chapter XXIII. Gray's Inn.


About midway along the crooked, narrow street of Stromness stood
the one house of entertainment of the port--Gray's Inn--where the
wind-bound sailors and idle fishermen usually regaled themselves
and spun yarns. The host, Oliver Gray, who was himself a retired
seaman, had sought to attract his customers by hanging out over his
front door a sign which was calculated to win the good opinion of
all seafaring folk. It was a representation of a clipper in full
sail on a raw green sea. Oliver took great pride in this picture,
and it was commonly believed that he had had a hand in the painting
of it. When it was praised he was profuse in his acknowledgments;
but if a critical captain asked him how it was that, though the
ship was sailing before the wind, yet her colours were all flying
aft, or inquired whether it was grass or cabbages she sailed upon,
Oliver was less eager to claim any artistic ability, and hurried
the critic into the house lest he should also discover that the
shrouds had been omitted by the painter.

Gray's Inn was not an ordinary public house, and beyond the
signboard announcement that "Spiritis and aile is retailed here"
there was little to indicate its commercial character. The parlour
was a large room with a window at each end--one facing the street,
the other being so situated that the seamen sitting at the large
centre table could look out at their ships riding at anchor across
the bay. There was no counter or bar, and the liquor was brought
"ben" by Oliver or his sonsie wife.

One Saturday morning I had to go there to see old David Flett about
a boat that Captain Gordon wanted to buy from him. I found him at
the inn before me, sitting there with a goodly company of Stromness
men and skippers, whose ships were, like the Lydia, undergoing
repairs or waiting for fair winds.

When I went in he was talking with a skipper whom he was evidently
well acquainted with. This was Captain Wemyss of The Duncans,
outward bound for Bombay. Wemyss had been lying in the harbour for
over a week, and now that fair weather had come, and the wind was
veering round to a favourable quarter, he was contemplating
weighing anchor. His vessel was a full-rigged ship, the largest in
the bay; and all the other skippers seemed to pay him a degree of
respect equal to the size of his ship. They looked upon him with
such deference, indeed, that not one of them would think of heaving
anchor until he led the way.

In the mornings, when they turned out, they never looked at the sky
or the direction of the wind; they instinctively turned to The
Duncans, and if the Blue Peter was not at her fore peak they made
arrangements for spending still another day among the Orkneys.

What in Wemyss tended to call forth a good deal of respect was that
he seldom mixed with the other captains, but condescended to take
only a single glass with a select few. I noticed that he preferred
the company of Bailie Duke, or of Lloyd's agent, and other magnates
of the town.

Flett received me with a friendly welcome when I went into the inn,
ordering a cup of coffee for me, and bidding me sit beside him
until Captain Gordon should join us. He spoke of me to Captain
Wemyss, and at that the whole company present fell to talking of
the accident in the Sound. They were in the midst of a discussion
as to the cause of the disaster when Captain Gordon entered,
accompanied by Bailie Duke.

Gordon was somewhat of a stranger to them all, so Captain Wemyss
gave the names of the others, including Lloyd's agent, Captain
Miller of the Albatross, and Captain Abernethy of the brig
Enterprise, the last of whom, I may tell you, was the officer my
father had described to Gordon as knowing so little of navigation
that he had, after cruising out of sight of land for some months,
mistaken the Mainland of Orkney for one of the West Indian Islands.

Bailie Duke, whose happy face wore a constant smile, and whose
bright eyes seemed ever to be asking questions, took his seat in
the armchair, and passing his snuffbox round the company, very soon
took the lead in the conversation. He was the chief magistrate of
the town, but he did not assume any undue dignity on that account.
Indeed, his long life among the simple fisher folk of Stromness,
and his business connection with ships--for the bailie was a
shipping agent--had given him a sympathy with all persons connected
with the sea which quite overrode his dignity as a magistrate. He
could talk of ships as learnedly as any of the captains, and of
every vessel that had been in the harbour for the last twenty years
he could tell the name and history whenever he saw her again. As
for his knowledge of freights, duty, stability, and the ordinary
affairs of shipping, he was the one man in Stromness whose word was
taken above all others.

When Bailie Duke was comfortably settled in his easy chair, and
there was a lull in the noise of conversation, he turned to Captain
Gordon and asked him to tell the company how he had come by the
hurt in his head, and what sort of a time he had had in the recent
storm.

"Well, ye see," said Gordon, taking a glance round his hearers'
faces, "it was a most unlucky affair from the first. I was warned
before I left Stromness that my masts were too high, and in
addition to the fear of losing them I was troubled by my men
declaring that the ship was bewitched. We were overrun with mice,
d'ye see. Well, I got a cat, a wild-like animal, from old Grace
Drever here. Young Ericson brought the beast aboard, but what
became of it I cannot exactly tell, for no man could find it,
though we could often hear its wild squealing at night.

"From the moment Pilot Ericson left us outside the Sound we
encountered misfortune. We reached Cape Wrath after a struggle
against contrary winds, and off the Butt of Lewis we lay to for two
days. The men swore that the cat down the hold was possessed of
some evil demon, and that we would never make any progress on the
voyage unless we turned back and took the animal home. Well, we
beat about until we sighted St. Kilda, where wet weather came on,
and a gale from the west sprang up. We made no headway, and the
island lay like an impassable rock on our beam for three days. The
sea came rolling on from the west--great snow-topped mountains of
waves--and the spray and the cutting sleet were hard to stand
against. One night we shipped a heavy sea, which carried away our
port bulwarks and stanchions and sent me into the lee scuppers,
where I was stunned by a blow on the head. The same sea smashed the
jolly boat.

"I was insensible for a couple of days, and when I crept on deck
again I found the other boat had been stove in. The fore and main
topgallant masts were gone. I was standing on the quarterdeck,
when, just at midnight, I was startled by a most unearthly
caterwauling, as though all the furies in the infernal regions had
broken loose. I looked in the direction it came from, and, behold!
there stood the cat like a frightful apparition. He seemed four
times his original size, and his eyes were like two gleaming fires.
Even now I am not sure if it was the flesh-and-blood Baudrons or
his ghost come to explain the mystery of his disappearance, and
vent his displeasure at me for having taken him from his
comfortable home. As I looked at the goblin cat my head reeled and
I fell on the deck.

"Next morning all was calm and bright; but we were disabled, and it
was necessary to put back for repairs. You may think what you like,
mates, but as sure as we're here, it was nothing but the cat that
brought on the gale and gave me my ill luck; the worst calamity of
all being the loss of the pilot and his crew."

"Ay," said Bailie Duke, "but the cat had nothing to do with the
loss of the pilots. Nobody can be blamed for that but Carver
Kinlay."

"No," added Oliver Gray, "a greater rascal than Carver never set
foot in Orkney, nor a braver man than Ericson."

"Well," said Captain Wemyss, "this Kinlay may do as he likes, but I
for one will have no business with him."

"Nor I neither," said Captains Johnson and Miller at once.

"He's no proper pilot," said Gray, "and has no right to run a
boat."

"I'm afraid, gentlemen," put in Lloyd's agent with a tone of
authority, "you're a wee bit too late in bringing forward your
objections, for I'm informed that Kinlay has already taken out all
necessary papers, and is now a duly certified pilot."

"What!" exclaimed Abernethy. "I'd sooner employ young Ericson here
than Kinlay; I'm sure the lad kens more about the coast."

"I'd trust that lad to take my ship through any channel in Orkney,"
added Captain Gordon. "He brought us through on Sunday, and I never
saw a pilot--except his father--handle a ship with greater skill."

Mr. Gordon was speaking thus in my praise, when who should walk
into the inn but Carver Kinlay himself.

Carver had on a new suit of clothes of blue cloth, and his high
boots, reaching above the knees, were newly polished with oil. At
his waist he wore a leather belt from which was suspended a long
sheath knife. He walked in with a jaunty air of self importance,
but with a slightly unsteady gait, which showed how he had been
celebrating his appointment. He approached Captain Wemyss, and
addressed him.

"Ye'll be weighing anchor on Monday morning, captain, I suppose?
What time shall I come aboard?"

"I never asked you to come aboard my ship, my man," said Captain
Wemyss. "What is it you want?"

"Why, d'ye not know I'm the pilot?"

Captain Abernethy interrupted him, and drew him round by the
shoulder to face the company, saying:

"You'd not be the pilot if you hadna gotten the post by your
crafty, sneaking, murderous villainy, Carver Kinlay. What business
had you putting out to the Lydia on Sunday?"

"What business is that of yours?" was the response.

"Every one has business in a case like this," said Abernethy, "and
I'll wager a thousand pounds if you hadn't gone out the accident
wouldn't have happened. It was nothing else than the fear that
you'd get aboard before them that made the men think of boarding
the barque in such a hurry, and so far out. I knew the men well,
poor fellows, and they were all decent men and good pilots, every
one of them."

While Abernethy was saying this, Kinlay was venting a torrent of
oaths and words in disparagement of my father and his men.

"You villain! you rascal!" continued the skipper, "if you say
another word against Sandy Ericson I'll pitch you out at the
window!"

At the same time Bailie Duke stepped forward and said:

"Now just hold your filthy tongue, Kinlay. You've been trying for
years to do what you've done now. You've gotten your wish; what
more do you want?"

The bailie succeeded in quieting him, and Carver slunk off to a
corner of the room. The company, after this interruption,
dispersed, leaving only Captain Gordon, Kinlay, Captain Miller, and
myself.

No further words had been exchanged before a stalwart fisherman
entered. I immediately recognized Jack Paterson. Jack was, as I
have before said, a powerful man. He came in with a firm resolution
in his step, and looked around the room. We watched him closely,
for there was something strange in his look.

On seeing Kinlay he walked straight up to him, laid a big hand on
his shoulder--the hand that wanted a finger--and, without a word,
dragged him to the middle of the room. Kinlay turned quickly round,
and putting his hand on his sheath knife drew the weapon. Without
hesitation Paterson stepped forward and dealt a tremendous blow
with his fist on Carver's nose.

"Ye ken what that's for--I needna tell ye," said Paterson; and
Kinlay reeled over and fell upon the floor, while Jack Paterson
walked quietly into the street.

The explanation of this swift chastisement was this. There had that
morning been a small indignation meeting of Stromness fishermen.
They were all determined that Kinlay should see they had no
sympathy with him, and the purpose of the meeting was to determine
what form of vengeance they should employ.

Their method was simply that which Jack Paterson had carried out,
in boldly confronting Kinlay with closed fists; and when Jack's
fellow fishermen heard what he had done their revenge was
satisfied, and they returned to their daily duties with accustomed
quietude, only agreeing in this, that thereafter Carver Kinlay was
to be recognized as the common enemy of all true Orkney men; that
he was not to be molested, but that none was to give him help in
any way soever.



Chapter XXIV. Carver Kinlay's Success.


The Lydia was laid up for about a fortnight. A slight delay in
completing her repairs was occasioned by the want of timber--a
scarce commodity in Orkney, where there are no trees--but suitable
material was procured from a homeward-bound ship. Captain Gordon
never, in my hearing, referred directly to my sister Jessie's
caution about the barque's masts; but I noticed that the new masts
were made shorter and stouter than those that had suffered in the
storm. There was also some difficulty in procuring new boats for
the ship; but Captain Flett at last found a jolly boat, and one
morning early I took it out to the Lydia.

When I went below I found Mr. Gordon sitting over his breakfast
with Marshall, his first mate. I remained talking with them for
some time, when we were interrupted by one of the ship's boys, who
came down with a note to the skipper.

Captain Gordon read it with some show of consternation.

"What can be the meaning of that, Marshall?" he asked, handing the
piece of paper across the table to the mate.

"Why, captain, I suppose you've been getting into some scrape
ashore," said Marshall.

"Scrape! I've been in no scrape," said Gordon, "unless, indeed, it
be the accident last Sunday week."

And he handed the note to me, asking if I could throw any light
upon it.

The note was from Bailie Duke, and it ran as follows:

"Be in readiness. An officer from Kirkwall will be on board of you
in a little with a summons.--Yours, &c., H. Duke."

I had hardly finished reading it when a noise as of someone
boarding was heard on deck, and presently Captain Miller of the
Albatross came rushing down the cabin stairs. He was evidently
newly out of his bunk for his face was unwashed, his hair uncombed,
and his large overcoat was roughly thrown over his sleeping
clothes.

"What the mischief does this mean?" he exclaimed throwing a note on
the table the facsimile of that which was puzzling Captain Gordon.

The two skippers were forming surmises, and were at last consoling
themselves that it was some playful trick of the bailie's, when
Marshall whispered through the skylight that a boat with seven men
in it was pulling towards the ship.

"Show them down if they come aboard, then," ordered Gordon.

And Captain Miller rushed into the pantry to hide, dreading
something serious; for he had let it out to us that he had been "on
the spree" the night before, and was not the quietest of the
company of which he had been a member. He locked the pantry door as
he heard footsteps on the companion ladder.

Two men entered the cabin. One was a big seafaring man with a
weatherbeaten face. The very appearance of his companion betrayed
the fact that he was the "officer from Kirkwall."

"Beautiful morning this!" observed the big man, addressing Captain
Gordon. Then after a pause he added: "We have just come, captain,
to ask the favour of your company with us to Kirkwall. The officer
here has a summons for you, I believe, and also one for Captain
Miller of the Albatross, who is not at present on his ship."

Here a deep groan came from the direction of the pantry.

"A summons!" echoed Gordon. "What--why--what d'ye mean? What have I
been doing?"

"Oh! my dear sir," returned the officer from Kirkwall, "you do not
seem to understand the nature of the thing. You have done nothing
at all, my dear sir. We only want you to come to Kirkwall as a
witness in the case of assault--'Kinlay versus Paterson'--to be
tried today at Kirkwall."

"Oh! then, if that's all, I'm here," said Captain Miller, coming in
from the pantry and adjusting his coat.

"That is," said the man with the weatherbeaten face, supplementing
the officer's explanation--"that is the case of the broken nose,
captain. Now, we--that is, Mr. Watt and myself--have nothing to do
with it, really and truly; but the matter is just this, we are
anxious to clear off Jack Paterson, who is in our boat alongside
with us--"

Here the speaker was interrupted by the appearance of Captain
Abernethy.

"Come on, Gordon, old boy!" said he; "come along. I'm going to pay
all expenses, every penny of them. I'm willing to sport a thousand
pounds to clear Jack Paterson. Only to think of that scurvy rascal
Kinlay bringing up Jack, and him with a wife and a whole crew of
young children. Shall we allow it? No; not if I can help it. Come
along!"

Abernethy was generous, certainly. He had lately, as I heard,
fallen heir to the sum of five hundred pounds sterling, and his
willingness to "sport" his thousands on every important occasion
was one of his chief characteristics at this period.

"But how far is this place Kirkwall?" asked Captain Gordon. "How
long will it take us to get there?"

"How far! Oh! only a matter of a few hours' sail," said Abernethy.
"I've got my pinnace out, and we'll have a fine jaunt. Come along!"

"No. I've to see old Flett this morning to pay him some money.
Besides, we're too many for the pinnace. Can we not go by road?"

And Captain Gordon looked to me for an answer.

"You can get Oliver Gray's pony and gig," I replied. "It's about
fourteen miles by road."

"Will you come with me, then, Halcro?" he asked.

"Certainly; I'll be very glad. I know the way well."

The two other skippers, with Mr. Watt and the rest, then made
arrangements for their boating party, intending to sail round to
Scapa, and thence walk across the little peninsula to Kirkwall.

When Mr. Gordon had brushed himself up a bit, we went ashore
together and found out Davie Flett, whose business occupied very
little of the captain's time, and soon we were at the door of
Oliver Gray's inn watching his Shetland pony being harnessed into
the gig.

"Now, Halcro, are you going to drive? Up you get," said Mr. Gordon.

"Surely you dinna expect me to drive, Captain Gordon!" I exclaimed.
"Why, I never held a pair of reins in my life!"

"All right, my lad! get over to larboard there, and I'll see what
we can do. You can be pilot and give your orders, and I'll take the
helm.

"Come along, Sheltie; off we go!"

The weather was very fine, the roads in good condition, and the
pony fresh, so that we looked for a very pleasant drive to the
capital. We drove along the north road by Hamla Voe and past the
green cornfields of Cairston, and then over the hill until the
great loch of Stenness stretched before us, reflecting on its
surface the dappled, woolly clouds.

When we reached the Bridge of Waithe and turned westward, I asked
my companion to slacken pace, for I had seen on the white road in
advance of us two figures that were familiar to me.

"Who are they, Halcro?" Mr. Gordon inquired; "two of your school
friends, eh?"

"Yes," I replied. "The lassie walking on the grass with the bare
feet and carrying a green bag is Hilda Paterson--Jack Paterson's
daughter."

"Ay! Jack Paterson's girl, eh? Well, and the other one with the
pretty hair, walking along here like a stately young princess, who
is she?"

We were already close to the two girls, however, and I hesitated to
reply. He drew the reins, and I saw him regarding the elder girl
with great interest.

She raised her blue eyes as we stopped--eyes as blue and clear as
the sky itself. Her fair hair hung in waves about her shoulders,
and as her rosy lips were parted to say, "Good morning, Halcro!"
they revealed a row of white and regular teeth.

"Good morning, Thora!" I said in reply to the greeting she had
given.

"I hope your foot is mending," said she very gently.

"Yes," said I; and Captain Gordon turned to me as though he
wondered at my sudden shyness.

Thora looked down at a daisy growing at her feet in the green turf,
seeming to seek inspiration from its golden heart. Then she raised
her eyes to me again and said softly--oh, so softly:

"I'm real glad, Halcro, that ye werena drowned when the Curlew was
wrecked."

I was about to thank her for the part she had taken in my rescue
when Captain Gordon interrupted. Said he:

"If that sinner, Carver Kinlay, had had his own way Halcro would
have been drowned like the rest."

Thora's cheeks grew crimson.

"It is my father you speak of, sir," she said very bravely; "and I
hope what ye say isna true."

"Your father! Carver Kinlay your father!" exclaimed the skipper
incredulously. "Really, I beg your pardon, my girl."

But already there was a tear in Thora's eye, and she turned to join
Hilda Paterson, who had gone on in advance. And the two girls
walked onward to school.

"Well!" ejaculated the captain as he whipped up pony, "well, I
should never have believed it!"

"Believed what, Mr. Gordon?" I asked.

"Why, that such a sweet young girl as that was the daughter of that
villainous Carver Kinlay."

"Ay! Thora's a bonnie lassie," I observed, with more feeling than I
meant the words to convey; "and she's as good as bonnie."

"My lad, thank Heaven that your lucky stone and your splendid
swimming saved you from that dreadful Sound of Hoy."

"I would rather they had saved my father, Mr. Gordon."

"I've no doubt you would, Halcro; but I was thinking of something
else. I was thinking that when you grow older, and when little
Thora--as you name her--is a woman--"

"Tuts! Mr. Gordon," said I, guessing what he would be at. "The
Kinlays and the Ericsons will never be friends."

Thereafter Captain Gordon became very quiet and thoughtful, and
when again he spoke it was about my own sister Jessie. He asked me
many a question concerning her; and if I turned from the subject to
point out some object in the scenery that I thought would interest
him, he was sure to lead me back in some way to talk of Jessie.

We had now passed by the standing stones of Stenness, which my
companion showed but little interest in, saying they were nothing
compared with the Druid circle of Stonehenge, in England; and our
way then lay along a straight uninteresting road past Finstown, and
by the southern shores of the Bay of Firth, where the green holms
of Damsay and Grimbister lay like floating gardens on the calm
water. Soon the great red cathedral of St. Magnus loomed in sight
above the antique houses of Kirkwall; and after our drive of
fourteen miles we entered the old town and pulled up at the
courthouse, where we met Abernethy and Miller and the rest who had
been of the boating party.

I took the pony and gig to the Falcon Inn, and left them there
until the trial should be over. I was alone the rest of the
morning, for such an important trial as that of "Kinlay versus
Paterson" must be conducted in private, and only those who appeared
as witnesses or in other capacities connected with the case were
permitted to be present.

But the time was not spent wearily, for I knew the town of Kirkwall
very well, and there were many folks anxious to hear from me the
full particulars of the fatality in Hoy Sound. Amongst these was
old Colin Lothian, whose wanderings had brought him to Kirkwall.
The old man sat with me on a stone seat in the shadow of the
cathedral, and talked long of the accident and of my own blighted
prospects, and at length of the trial that was now going on in the
courthouse.

I mentioned Thora, and said we had met her on the road in company
with Hilda Paterson. Colin was fond of Thora, and talked of her
with affection, notwithstanding his hatred of her father.

"Ay, there again, there again, you see," said he. "What cares the
lass though her father brings up Jack Paterson? It doesna make a
bawbee's difference in Thora's liking for Jack's lass. Ah there's
good in Thora. She's a right good girl, my lad, and I warrant she
would do anything for them that are good wi' her."

As we sat there Captain Gordon joined us sooner than I expected,
and I asked him how they had settled the case.

"Oh!" said he, "the trial hasn't begun yet; the humbug of a sheriff
clerk has sent us away till three o'clock."

"What like a man is the sheriff's clerk, sir?" asked Lothian.

"I can't tell you that, my man, for we never saw him," replied the
skipper. "He has a clerk, who has also a clerk, and this last one
is the only one we saw. Why, the Governor of Jamaica has not so
many functionaries."

Until three o'clock Captain Gordon went about the town with me--to
the cathedral, where he examined the old Norman arches, the dim old
epitaphs, and other relics of antiquity contained within these
ancient temple walls. There were many other sights of curious
interest to the captain about Kirkwall; for here were the decayed
palaces of earls, the halls of old sea kings, and thick-walled
mansions of the lordly times--many of them degraded into hostelries
and shops, but all of them showing something of the glories of old
Orcadia. Thus we passed the time until three o'clock.

In the evening, when I joined the Stromness party, I found Captain
Abernethy exclaiming in indignant terms against the result of the
trial.

"I knew how it would go," he said; "but still I wanted just to show
them what was what, ye see. Of course, it was as well they went
through all the due forms. But only to think of Kinlay getting off
so cleanly! I don't mind paying the fine, Jack--it has got you off
going to jail--but, hang it, I don't like paying Kinlay's
expenses."

Kinlay had gained the case. Jack Paterson was fined fifteen
shillings and costs, or a fortnight in Kirkwall jail. Abernethy had
paid the fine on the spot. Carver, therefore, was throughout
successful.

Not only had he gained in the assault case, but in the matter of
the piloting he was equally fortunate. He was permitted to carry on
his business in the St. Magnus, and notices were posted up
forthwith on the quays at Stromness to inform the inhabitants that
Carver Kinlay of Crua Breck, in the parish of Sandwick, was a duly
certified pilot of Pomona.



Chapter XXV. A Family Removal.


I was one evening walking over the heathery braes of Lyndardy, in
the direction of Stromness, with my sister Jessie. The soft breeze
from across the sea played with her brown hair, which was bound by
the silken snood usually worn by the Orkney girls. A scarlet bootie
shawl covered her shoulders. In her hand she carried a basket
filled with kitchen vegetables from the farm.

As we walked our attention was directed to a number of fishing
boats putting out to sea, and to the slow and mournful song of the
fishermen as they set out, with the creaking of their long oars
keeping time to the music of their voices. Then the red mainsails
were hoisted to catch the light breeze blowing over from the region
of the setting sun, and we stood and watched the boats.

But presently, as I looked further down the hillside where we were,
I saw the figure of a man leaning upon a low stone wall. He was
looking across to the wild headland of Hoy, where the red beetling
cliffs reflected the sunlight.

"Jessie," I said, "is that Captain Gordon standing down there?"

Jessie turned her eyes in the direction I pointed, and her cheeks
were flushed with the red light that fell upon them.

"Oh, Halcro!" she exclaimed, "I've forgotten to bring the butter.
We must go back to the farm."

"Never mind, Jessie; I'll run back for it," I said, though I would
have been glad to see the captain again.

She, however, made no objection, but let me go back to Lyndardy,
while she continued her way towards Stromness.

I had been gone something like a half hour, and as I was returning,
walking briskly over the heathery braes and skipping across the
rippling burns, down the hillside in front of me I saw Jessie
standing with Captain Gordon, and his arm was round her waist. I
stopped suddenly, wondering if I should proceed further and
interrupt them. And now I understood how it was that Jessie had
forgotten the butter, and how she had so calmly agreed to my going
back to the farm. I seemed also to understand how it was that
Captain Gordon had spoken so much about my sister during our drive
to Kirkwall. And with these explanations in my mind I took my way
homeward by a roundabout path along the cliffs, and so passed
unobserved, reaching Stromness just in time to see Jessie and the
captain parting at the end of the town.

On the following day the Lydia set sail. It pained us to see the
vessel taken out of port by Carver Kinlay; but when she had rounded
the Ness, Jessie and I went up to the head of the cliffs and
watched the white sails over the sea, until they became a mere
speck on the far horizon. Then, as we were coming back, and I
remarked the tears in Jessie's eyes, I learned what I had already
partly guessed--that Captain Gordon had asked my sister to be his
wife.

Hard was the struggle that we had at home, after the first weeks of
mourning and grief that followed the loss of my father and uncle.
We had now no regular source of income, beyond the few shillings
every week that my mother and sister earned by the straw-plaiting
industry. This was work that was common in Orkney at that time; but
the English hat manufacturers, for whom the straw was plaited, were
not always liberal in their payments, nor prompt; and it was only
by very hard work that these few shillings could be earned.

My father had been thrifty, and had saved some little money; but
when we came to calculate the full measure of our resources, we
discovered that several alterations would have to be made in our
mode of living. Not the least important of these changes was the
necessity of an early removal to Lyndardy.

Lyndardy farm had been leased conjointly by my father and my uncle
Mansie; and when there was no occasion for them to be out in the
boat, the two men were in the habit of working together in the
fields, as most of our neighbours worked. It was from Lyndardy that
we were supplied with all our oatmeal, our eggs, cheese, butter,
and vegetables. Fresh fish we could always procure in abundance
from the sea and the lochs, and I was able sometimes to add to the
general stock of provisions by the aid of my gun. The feathers and
oil from the wild sea fowl I shot were sold or bartered for other
commodities; and the wool of the few sheep we kept, and the flax we
grew, were helpful in supplying us with clothing and other
necessaries.

It was not long after my father had "gone before" that we removed
from the old house in the Anchor Close.

Much of our familiar furniture was sold. My boat, too, was disposed
of. Many a heart pang it cost us to leave the home at the
waterside, but we all took kindly to the new life at the farm and
its various duties. Jessie soon became skilled in the work of
attending to the cows; and as for myself, I readily learned how to
mend a gate, to dig potatoes, to look after the sheep, and even to
follow the plough. Thus I busied myself until, in after-time, I was
able to take to the sea.

When the warm weather came round, the boys and girls of Andrew
Drever's school were dismissed for their holidays. Sometimes, when
I saw some of them passing along the cliffs with their climbing
ropes over their arms, I confess I felt some twinge of regret that
I was no longer a schoolboy, and that my duties on the farm no
longer permitted me to join in the pleasures of a bird-catching
expedition. My fowling piece was now hung up in the barn, and few
were my opportunities of taking it down. What sport it would have
afforded me had I been still a schoolboy!

On a certain fine morning, soon after the holidays commenced, I was
very busily employed at the work of helping in our sheep
shearing--not that I myself ventured to handle the shears; my part
in the business was simply to carry the wool into the loft, and to
assist in bringing out the sheep from the pens as the shearers
required them. My mother, who had been born and brought up on
Lyndardy farm, was, however, an expert hand at sheep-shearing, and
I believe there was no other woman in the whole parish of Stromness
who could do the work with such speed and neatness.

I was admiring the skill with which she stripped a sheep of its
fleece, and standing near her at the same time, with a black-faced
ewe between my knees, ready to pass the animal to her when she was
ready for it. Letting the shorn ewe escape, she stood up and looked
over the moorland in the direction of Stromness.

"Hullo! here's some stranger coming up the brae," she said, shading
her eyes with her hand. "Who in the world can it be, Halcro? Surely
it's not the dominie?"

But the dominie it was. He came up to where we were at work, and
sat upon a heathery knoll near my mother, with whom he engaged in
some ordinary gossip.

"But," said he, after a while, "it was Halcro himself that I came
up to see."

"Me!" I said. "What can ye want to see me about, Mr. Drever?"

"To tell you that I'm to gang to Edinburgh," he replied.

"To Edinburgh!" I exclaimed, wondering what his mission could be.

"Ay, Halcro, I'm to be there for a few weeks, partly on pleasure
and partly on business, concerning our auld friend Jarl Haffling.
The museum folk there are anxious to have the viking's treasure,
and I hae gotten permission to deal wi' them in the matter. I dinna
ken what money they will gie me for the things; but, ye see,
whatever it be, Halcro, a third part of it will come to Hercus and
Rosson and yersel', to be divided among ye. Do ye agree to that?
Will ye trust me to transact the business for ye?"

"Oh, certainly, sir. But surely it's ower muckle trouble to put you
to?" I said.

"Trouble! Dinna think o' trouble, lad. Why, these auld coins and
things hae been mair pleasure to me than I can tell; for, look ye,
all the time I hae had the keeping o' them, I hae been studying
them; and--and, Halcro, I hae even written a little book about Jarl
Haffling's grave, and I shouldna be surprised though that book be
printed. Think o' that, lad! A book written by your ain dominie
printed! Nay, nay, Halcro, dinna speak o' trouble."

"And what is being done about Tom Kinlay, sir?" I asked.

"Weel, as to that, ye see, the lad has broken the law by
appropriating his part o' the treasure, and selling it. I can do
nothing mysel', beyond stating the nature o' his offence. The law
must tak' the matter into its own hands. Beyond a doubt it will do
so; and ye'll see, Halcro, that it was far better for you and the
other two lads to put the viking's treasure into my hands, instead
o' makin' fools o' yersels as Tom Kinlay has done."

"I am sure, sir, I am perfectly satisfied," I said. "And now, Mr.
Drever, I suppose you will wish me to give up my magic stone? Must
it go to Edinburgh with the rest?"

"The talisman? Weel, I hadna thought that. Ye see, it isna worth
muckle. No, I think ye needna send it now. But keep it wi' care,
dinna lose it, just in case it is wanted. Of course I hae written
about it in the book, and it may be claimed; but keep it for the
present, Halcro."

The schoolmaster left me to continue my work, and three days
afterwards I heard that he had started for Edinburgh in a trading
sloop that plied between Kirkwall and Leith.

He was absent in Scotland for nearly two months, and when he
returned I received a message from him asking me to bring Willie
Hercus and Robbie Rosson down to the schoolhouse on a particular
evening. He welcomed us with much affection, and during tea he
related to us many of his experiences in Edinburgh.

But his chief reason for having us with him on that evening was, as
he said, to give us an account of his stewardship in regard to the
viking's treasure. He had had several interviews with the
authorities of the Antiquarian Museum, with whom he had finally
left the curiosities, receiving in return a due share of money to
be delivered in equal portions to the three of us.

I believe that the Jarl Haffling's treasures may be seen to this
day in the Antiquarian Museum of Edinburgh; but I have seen only
the catalogue, in which the curiosities are enumerated and
described as having been found by some boys playing on the shore of
Skaill Bay, Orkney. Be that as it may, the money brought back by
Mr. Drever--which was greatly in excess of our expectations, and
allowed to each of us a share much larger than Tom Kinlay had
received from old Isaac--came as a great help not only to my
mother, but also to the widow of Tom Hercus, to say nothing of Mrs.
Rosson, whose rent had fallen so far in arrear that she had been
threatened with an eviction from her cottage, and was only saved by
this timely assistance.



Chapter XXVI. A Subterranean Adventure.


It was little that I saw of my old school companions now that I had
become a farm worker and spent my days in the fields. Sometimes,
indeed, when I was tending my nibbling flock on the hillside, or
driving them over to the distant pasture land by the margin of the
loch of Harray, where the grass grew sweetest, I would chance to
see Thora Kinlay on her way from Crua Breck to Stromness, and
occasionally she would come to Lyndardy to see my sister Jessie.
These were the summer days; but when the harvest season came round,
and our crop of oats had to be gathered in, and, later still, our
turnips stored away for the winter, I was then always busy with my
work, and very seldom had opportunity of speaking with Thora, or of
even seeing her from a distance.

And yet I had often a wish to be near her, and to show her what
kindness or sympathy a lad can show to a girl whom he believes to
have but little happiness in life. For the treatment that Thora
received at her home was becoming day by day more severe.

With Tom she of course had no pursuits in common; he treated her
with harshness, and as much as possible she avoided him. Even Mrs.
Kinlay seemed to regard her with very scant affection, and as the
girl grew in years her position at the farm became that of a
servant rather than of a daughter. As for Carver Kinlay himself, he
seldom spoke a gentle word to body or beast, and Thora had no
exception from his severity. His continued ill treatment of her
was, however, the more difficult to endure, since from simple abuse
it often extended to actual brutality. She could never understand
why her father and mother were so unkind to her, and to hear a few
words of sympathy was always comforting.

One day late in the autumn I was tending our sheep on the banks
above the cliffs of Gaulton, lying on the soft green turf with my
hands under my chin, looking dreamily across the sea towards the
blue outline of hills on the Scotch coast. I had just finished
reading the last pages of Robinson Crusoe, and the book had fallen
from my hand. Like my sheep, I was languid with the heat of the
noonday sun, and the sight of the ships and the whirling seagulls
was refreshing to me. The sound of the waves down below on the
rocks was soothing.

Presently something dropped lightly on the grass before my eyes. It
was a sprig of sweetbrier. I turned lazily and saw Thora standing
by my side. Without speaking a word she sat down, and together we
looked out upon the blue sea.

We remained silent for several moments without greeting each other.
But at last I said:

"I was thinking maybe you'd be coming across to see me, Thora, one
o' these bonnie days, now that we never meet at the school. It was
good o' ye to come."

She turned to me with a smile, but I saw that her eyes were
moistened with tears.

"What has gone wrong, Thora?" I continued. "Has Carver been ill
using you again?"

"Yes, he's aye using me ill," she said, sobbing and wiping her
eyes. "I was in the garden just now, nipping some dead leaves from
the briar bush, when he came in at the gate. He never likes to see
me among my flowers, and when he found me there he got into a
passion, and walked over the beds, and kicked the plants about with
his sea boots. Then he ordered me away into the house, and said
that if I wanted work to do, I might go and clean out the stable. I
told him that was a man's work, not a lassie's; and at that he took
up a stick, and struck me with it across the back."

And here she sobbed again.

I did not speak, but I felt my blood run hot in indignation against
Carver Kinlay. I would have liked to thrash him.

"If I were a lad like you, Halcro," she continued, "it's not long I
would bide at Crua Breck. I would run away to sea. But what can a
helpless lassie do? Nobody has a good word to say for my father
since the Curlew was lost, and--I canna help it--I hae just as
great an ill will at him as anybody else has."

"They say that it was all through Carver that my father was
drowned," I said.

"Tell me, Halcro, what was the quarrel between your father and
mine? What way did it come about?"

"Well, I canna tell ye the ins and outs o' it all, but my father
had some secret about Carver, and Carver was aye afraid o' him. You
see, Thora, folks say that when a man saves another from the sea,
there's sure to be a quarrel between them. And my father saved
Carver Kinlay--not, perhaps, from the sea, but he saved his life."

"How was that, Halcro?"

"It was when you were a bairn, Thora. A ship was wrecked here on
the Gaulton rocks, and all your family were aboard. Your mother and
Tom were picked up by the Curlew, but Carver and you werena found
for some days after the wreck. My father found you both in a cave,
down in the cliff, and if it hadna been for him, I suppose you
wouldna be here now, Thora, to say that Carver had beaten you."

"That's a strange thing you're telling me, Halcro. I never heard of
it before. And what ship was it that was wrecked?"

"The Undine."

"The Undine! I've seen that name on a box at Crua Breck that father
keeps his money in. But tell me all about it. Did Captain Ericson
tell you about the wreck?"

"No. I only heard of it a week before he was drowned. It was Colin
Lothian and my uncle Mansie that told it me. Auld Colin kens all
about it, and more than he told to me."

"Colin is a good old man, Halcro. When next I see him I will ask
him to tell me what it was that he kept from you. Colin would keep
nothing from me, I believe."

"Maybe not. But listen, and I will give you the story as I heard
it."

Thora lay down on the grass, with her hands under her chin, and I
proceeded to tell her of the wreck of the Undine.

"Thank you, Halcro!" she said when I finished. "That is all very
new to me. I remember nothing of being in that cave. How cold I
must have been! But Carver was good to me then. I can almost
forgive him for trampling over my flowers."

Then, after a pause, she asked: "Have you ever been in that cave,
Halcro? Where is it?"

"I've not been in it," I said; "but I ken whereabout it is. Come
and I will show you."

And then I took her out to an abutting point of the headland, and
indicated the position of the cavern behind a great rock that hid
its entrance, a few feet above the high-tide mark.

"Halcro, d'you think we could get down there and see the cave?" she
asked. "Where are your climbing ropes?"

"We can manage it, I think, if you'll try it with me, Thora," I
said.

"Ay will I try it. Do you think I'm afraid?" said she.

Now, this adventure that Thora proposed was no small one, for the
North Gaulton cliffs are amongst the wildest and most rugged in all
Pomona, and they are very steep and dangerous to the climber. Yet
Thora was a cool-headed girl, strong of foot and wrist, and very
adventurous. I remember on one occasion, when several of us were
bird nesting together on the Black Craigs, she happened to get
stranded on a corner of rock, and could not either return or get
round the projecting point. I was watching her, and saw that she
had the wrong foot foremost. Her position was extremely dangerous,
for one false move would have sent her headlong to a frightful
death. But, holding on with one hand, she coolly took a piece of
oatcake from her pocket, and munched it. Then with a dexterous
movement she changed her position, got safely round the point, and
went onward.

"Why, Thora, were you not feared for yoursel?" I asked, when I got
near her again.

"If I'd been feared, Halcro, I wouldna be here now," she quietly
replied.

"I daresay that; but what made ye think of eatin' the bannock when
ye were in such danger?"

And, said she, "Weel, I just thought I was needing it."

But with all Thora's daring I was too sensible of the dangers of
the Gaulton Craigs to allow her to make the descent of an
unfamiliar precipice without climbing ropes, and when we had
determined to explore the cave, I ran home for my lines and an old
piece of tar rope to use as a torch in case we should require a
light.

Thora was anxious about my sheep possibly straying in my absence,
but I had a certain confidence in my flock, and assured her that as
I had never known them to stray, there was little danger of them
doing so now, especially as I had no dog to drive them over the
banks. We accordingly left the sheep grazing or sleeping
contentedly on the open braes, and proceeded on our adventure.

One end of the rope was firmly secured round a jut of rock, so that
the other extremity, when it was thrown over the brink, would fall
as near as possible to the mouth of the cavern. I went down some
distance to see that all was right and easy, and then we made the
descent together.

Neither of us made much use of the rope, but it was there for Thora
to take hold of if she should find that she could not get secure
hold on the jags of rock for her feet and hands; and I kept close
to her to aid her if need were. A stranger in Orkney might have
marvelled to see us, a lad and lass, climbing with such ease about
the face of a precipice of nearly two hundred feet in height above
the turbulent sea; but the thing was simple enough to our practised
hands and feet, and the regular layers and shelves of the old red
sandstone afforded for the most part secure resting places.

As we got further down, the disturbed sea birds fluttered and
screamed around our heads, the boldest even offering to peck at our
hands, but fearing to do so for all the clatter they made about it.

Once a great gray brent goose, with black head and staring eyes,
approached Thora with a loud, harsh cry, and flapped its wide,
outstretched wings against her. Thora took hold of the rope tightly
with both hands, and placing her feet on a narrow ledge of rock,
looked round and uttered a shrill, "Tr-r-r-r," frightening the bird
away.

When we got safely down to within a couple of fathoms of the
surface of the clear water, we left the rope and made our way along
a strip of flaggy gneiss, until we reached an immense boulder which
had been detached from the main cliff. This great rock lay before
the cavern in a way that, as we found, not only hid the entrance from
view, but also--except, I suppose, in very stormy weather--prevented
the sea from flowing in. I crept behind this barrier, holding Thora's
hand, and we were soon at the mouth of the cave.

A slanting ray of sunshine found its way within, illumining the
great vaulted roof and the dripping stalactites, that looked like
giant icicles hanging above us. We were able to walk or scramble
over the rocks and shingle for a considerable distance.

When we passed into a part of the grotto where the darkness
deepened, however, Thora began to show signs of timidity. She spoke
of having heard about many an Orcadian who, in attempting to reach
the innermost recesses of such caverns, had been taken possession
of by the evil spirits that were commonly believed to inhabit these
places; and the strangely-echoing sounds we heard were exaggerated
in her imagination, and became to her as the weird voices of
kelpies and water nymphs.

I endeavoured to allay her fears as I proceeded to strike a light,
and reminded her of the magic stone that I had hanging at my neck;
but still she was reluctant to go further.

"Take you the stone yourself then, Thora, if you're afraid," I
said, as I took the cord from my neck. "It will keep you from
danger." And I looped the cord over her head.

Now Thora had an implicit faith in the virtues of that little
stone, and when she felt it resting on her throat her fears were at
once conquered.

It took some trouble to light our torch, but with the help of some
wool from my cap as tinder I set to work with flint and steel, and
at last we got the tar rope in a blaze. Thora took the torch in
hand and picked her way over the rocky floor, exploring every nook
and cranny of the cave. So rapidly did she skip from stone to stone
and climb over the intervening boulders, that I frequently found it
difficult to keep up with her.

We tried to find some traces of the wreck of the Undine, or of
anyone having lived there, but we found nothing beyond a great heap
of oyster shells that had been thrown into one corner. But Carver
Kinlay might very well have existed comfortably in this immense
place, for, besides the dried fish that he was said to have found
among the wreckage, there was a fine bed of oysters within easy
reach of the entrance to the cave, and these shellfish are good
enough eating, I believe. How he managed to keep Thora alive for so
long without other food was, however, a thing I could with
difficulty understand, unless she fed upon the sea-birds' eggs.
Thora, herself, remembered nothing of having been in the cave
before, but she was very anxious to reach its furthest limits, and,
trusting to me to follow her, she went fearlessly onward.

Sometimes she would stoop to lift a stone, and would throw it in
front of her to discover if there was a clear passage, for the
light burned but dimly. Once when she did so the stone fell upon
something that gave a peculiar hollow sound, as though some wooden
box or barrel had been struck.

I took little notice of this, for I was at the moment groping my
way into a side chamber of the cave. I was feeling my way back
towards the torch, when Thora called me to her as though she had
made some new discovery. But as I hurried in the direction whence
her voice sounded, I was startled by a loud and piercing scream
which filled the cavern and re-echoed through the empty corridors.
For a moment I fancied it was the shrieking of some monster
inhabitant of the cave and was about to beat a retreat when I heard
my name called again.

"Halcro! Halcro! Help! help!"

And then the whole place was in utter darkness, and I heard nothing
but the dying echoes, and a strange purling of running water.

I made my way as speedily as I could to where I had last seen the
lighted torch, and as I got further and further into the cave, the
sound of running water grew more distinct, until I heard it just at
my feet. It was not the singing ripple of a shallow rivulet, but
the sonorous sound of a deep stream that, so far as I could make
out, ran athwart the cavern. I went down on my knees and put my
hand in the water to feel which direction it took, for I did not
now doubt that my companion had fallen in, and was even now
struggling somewhere in the dark water that was rushing past me.

My first impulse was to throw myself into the stream and swim about
until I found her, but this I considered would be vain, and I tried
to first find where she was by getting her if possible to answer
me. I called her several times by name, at the same time following,
as well as I could in the darkness, the direction taken by the
current. Oh, how I wished we had brought two torches instead of
only the one that was now lost!

As I crawled about from rock to rock, guiding myself by the
indistinct sounds I heard, I blamed myself for not having listened
to Thora's words of expressed fear at the opening of the cave. That
she had the viking's stone in her possession was a matter of small
comfort to me when I seriously reflected upon the extreme danger of
the situation, and I feared that, in spite of the supernatural aid,
she might even now be drowned, and that I would never again see her
fair face in life.

But I was determined not to leave the cave until I had found her,
and, accordingly, I continued the search with growing consternation.

No response came to my constant cries of "Thora! Thora!" and I
wandered hither and thither in the difficult darkness for what
appeared to me fully an hour's time. I became hopeless, and even
thought of trying to find my own way out of the cavern, that I
might summon help from Crua Breck. But still I was urged by some
inward feeling to go onward yet a little further.

Passing at length round an abutting angle of ragged wall, I entered
what appeared to be the extreme chamber of the cavern; and here my
eyes were for a moment dazzled by the appearance of a bright though
thin beam of golden sunlight, which shone from the west through a
narrow fissure in the rock, and glittered upon the unruffled
surface of a large and deep pool of water. With renewed hope I
again called Thora; but not far from where I was standing the water
curled in a cascade over its rocky bed, so to continue its
subterranean course into the sea, and the noise it made in falling
rendered my voice inaudible. The sight of that dark water gliding
smoothly to the edge of rock, and there tumbling over into greater
depths, seemed to tell me only too plainly what Thora's fate had
been.

I now began to despair of being able to escape into the outer air
before the night came on; the changing hues of the stream of light
that entered the cave already indicated the setting of the sun. But
by the welcome help of such light as remained I carefully surveyed
the chamber in which I stood.

Just as I was giving a last look round, I observed a slight
movement on the opposite edge of the stream. One hurried glance was
enough, for there, not a dozen yards from me, was Thora, clinging
with clasped hands to a large piece of rock, her long, fair hair
touched by the fading crimson light and dangling in the stream,
that rapidly passed her as though it would sweep her with it to
some unknown destiny. She seemed totally unconscious of all that
was going on around her, and I saw that her exhausted strength
could not long sustain her in her perilous position. Even as I was
thinking how best to reach her, I saw her hands suddenly relax
their hold upon the rock, and her helpless form floated slowly with
the current towards the dark abyss beyond.

Without hesitation I plunged into the stream. A few strong strokes
brought me to her side, and with one hand I firmly grasped her by
the arm. Another second and we both would have been carried over
the cataract, but the sense of our imminent danger gave me courage,
and with a great effort of strength I swam with my burden to the
side of the stream from which I had plunged, and eagerly clung to
the rock until my strength was renewed.

It was with considerable difficulty that I at last managed to raise
myself and the girl from the water, and place her unconscious form
upon a flat slab of rock. And now I endeavoured with such simple
skill as I could command to restore her exhausted animation. This
was a task I was little fitted for; but just as the last faint ray
of light died away and left the cavern in darkness, I had the
satisfaction of hearing her draw a deep breath and then utter my
name.

I found it no easy thing to carry her in my arms to the mouth of
the cave, and many halts did I make by the way, trying to discover
the light that should tell me that our peril was over. Before we
had gone very far, however, she was conscious enough to help me in
some sort, and by our united efforts we at length got so far on our
right way as to come in sight of the light of day, and thereafter
our journey was easy. The evening breeze that met us revived my
companion considerably, and she was able to stand up and thank me
in her girlish way for delivering her from her dangerous plight.

When she was sufficiently recovered to speak, she told me how it
was she had fallen into the water.

She had found a large tarpaulin spread out as though it covered
some hidden boxes, and, calling to me, she had tried to raise the
tarpaulin to look beneath it. But in standing up to do so she
unfortunately missed her foothold on the slippery rock, and falling
backward was plunged into the stream; and this was all that she
knew, except that being swept along by the water and struggling to
keep afloat she happened to touch a rock at the side, and had there
held on until, as she had expected, I was able to help her.

Having thus far got out of the cave, there remained yet the
difficulty of climbing up the cliff in the twilight. If I could get
Thora as far as the rope, I felt that the rest would be
comparatively easy. But she was very weak and cold, and I feared
for the result.

Fortunately, the shelf of rock along which we had to pass was
sufficiently wide for us to walk along by clinging to the cliff.
This was done with great care, and when the rope was reached I
bound it several times round her waist and secured it firmly under
her arms. Being assured that she was then quite safe in her
position, I took hold of the higher part of the climbing line and
with its assistance scaled the crag.

When I reached the top I gave Thora the signal, and by hauling the
rope up with all my strength I helped her to ascend. It was a long
time ere I felt sure that she was safe, but at last I heard her
call out that she was all right, and I stretched my hand down to
her. She took hold of it, and I assisted her until she stepped once
more upon the soft turf, and then, still holding her hand, I led
her home, deeply thankful that our adventure had ended without
fatality.



Chapter XXVII. A Family Misfortune.


I must now tell you what happened on that afternoon while I was
away from my sheep, neglecting my work, and seeking useless
adventure in the North Gaulton cave. But I must go back to record a
conversation that took place at Lyndardy on that same morning, so
that you may understand the gravity of the misfortune which was the
result of my neglect.

We were sitting over our early breakfast, my mother, Jessie, and I,
discussing the family resources for the coming winter--a subject
that had given us much anxiety since the death of my father and
uncle. Our concern was intensified by the fact that our harvest had
not turned out so fruitful as had been anticipated; for the oats
were light in the grain and the potatoes diseased; and the expenses
incurred for repairs and improvements on the farm, had well-nigh
exhausted the ready money that had been left by my father or
procured by the sale of the small boat and various articles of
furniture from the old home. To make matters worse--and this it was
that suggested the discussion--Jessie had been down in Stromness on
the previous evening, and there ascertained that the price paid for
straw-plaiting, which was never very high, was to be greatly
reduced.

"I'm sure we're ill enough off already without them cutting us down
at such a rate," said my mother, as she took a sip of tea from her
saucer. "If it had not been for what the dominie brought from
Edinburgh for Hal's silver, we'd have been most hard pressed this
while back. But what we're to do when the winter comes round, I
dinna ken. It's certain we'll not have meal enough to serve us; and
there's the rent to pay, and clothes to get, and nothing coming in
at all."

"Well, mother," said Jessie, "dinna take on so ill about it. We're
not more hard pressed than our neighbours. Look at Janet Ross with
all her bairns, and her rent owing for three terms; and auld Betty
Matthew, at the Croft, who hasna a penny forbye what she gets at
the kelp burning. We have our two bonnie cows, and a score of good
sheep, and all our hens."

"We have all that," replied my mother. "But I'm thinking the sheep
must be sold at Martinmas, or we'll not have much of a living for
winter."

"Then, if you sell the sheep, Halcro will need to go to the
fishing," said Jessie.

"He'll need to get work somewhere. The lad canna aye be idle; and
there's nothing but the fishing for him, I doubt, if he doesna gang
to the piloting with Carver Kinlay."

"No, not that," I said. "I'd rather burn kelp than have anything to
do with him."

So it was agreed that our sheep were to be sold, and that I must
find work of some sort whereby to help the family.

Now, in the afternoon, when they found I did not come back to tea,
they surmised that I had already gone to look for employment at
Kirkwall, and they waited impatiently for my return. After tea my
mother went to the byre to attend to the cows, and Jessie stood for
a long time at the door looking out for me. Seeing no sign of me,
nor of the sheep, she walked in the direction of the North Hill,
there to get a wider prospect. She looked towards every likely
quarter, but the last place she thought of looking at was Kinlay's
clover field. There were some sheep grazing there, but Jessie never
imagined that they were the sheep of Lyndardy; for what should take
them into that forbidden pasture?

And yet their number was remarkable. Yes, there were our twenty
sheep, with our big cheviot in their midst, coolly enjoying
themselves in the fine clover grass that Carver was jealously
reserving for the benefit of his own ewes. Without waiting to
explain to herself the meaning of what she saw, or the reason of my
being away from the sheep, Jessie hastened towards the clover
field. As she approached, however, something occurred that made her
run with all speed.

Suddenly there was a commotion among the sheep and a noisy barking,
for in their midst was Tom Kinlay with his great retriever dog. He
chased the sheep into a corner of the enclosure, and proceeded to
belabour them with a heavy stick. The cheviot, however, bolder than
Tom had supposed, turned at bay, made a heavy rush at him, and
butting him aside bounded over the low wall, followed by all the
flock.

Tom was soon on his feet, and with his dog he gave chase. One of
the small Shetland ewes was overtaken, and disabled by a knock on
the head. The other animals, led by the cheviot, were running madly
towards the cliffs when Jessie, arriving on the scene, attempted to
intercept them. But the dog was fleet of foot, and, encouraged by
Tom's cries of "After them, good dog, after them!" continued the
pursuit with high enjoyment.

The cheviot, with the stupidity of its kind, saw not the danger to
which it was hastening. Panic stricken, it rushed towards a part of
the cliffs known as the Lyre Geo, and no efforts of Jessie could
divert its onward career.

When Kinlay became conscious of what he had done he called back his
dog. But as he watched the sheep bounding and leaping on in their
mad course his apprehensions gave place to merriment; and when the
cheviot, with a high spring into the air, went headlong over the
precipice, followed by the smaller sheep, he burst forth into a fit
of laughter loud and uncontrolled.

"You great brute, Tom Kinlay!" exclaimed Jessie indignantly; "if
Halcro had been here you would not have done this cruel thing."

"Well," said Tom, "what for did the sheep go into our field, eating
up all the clover? Halcro should have been minding them. It serves
you right that the sheep have gone over the bank."

This, and more that I know not of, was said between them. But
Jessie wasted no time in dispute. Her concern for the poor sheep
was too great for idle discussion.

"Come away," she demanded, "and help to get the poor beasts from
the water."

"Get the sheep from the water yourself," returned Tom stubbornly;
and whistling to his dog he went homeward as though nothing unusual
had happened.

On looking over the brink of the cliff Jessie found that it would
be useless to attempt without assistance to recover any of the
sheep. Two of them she saw floating out to sea, several of them lay
apparently dead far down on the rocks. One had fallen on a
projecting part of the cliff, and others, instead of jumping over
the edge, had run down a narrow pathway, and, though not injured,
stood in danger from the fact that they could neither proceed nor
turn back without falling.

Near as she was to Crua Breck, however, Jessie would not go thither
to seek the help she needed. Hurrying towards the croft of
Mouseland she saw two men at work in one of the fields, and they
readily laid down their spades and, after procuring a long rope,
went back with her to the Lyre Geo. Before sunset they were able to
recover the bodies of the animals that had fallen among the rocks,
as well as to rescue the sheep that were still alive.

This had all taken place before Thora and I had come up from the
Gaulton Cave; and as we turned from the head of the cliff to go
home a cart was passing along the moor conveying the dead and
injured sheep to Lyndardy--the sheep which only a few hours before
we had all so hopefully counted upon selling at Martinmas.

Sadly did we contemplate the poor remnant of the flock, and guilty
did I feel for having left the sheep unattended. At first my mother
blamed me sorely for what I had done; but when we talked the matter
over it seemed not so much my own fault in leaving the sheep (for
that had been done many a time before), but Kinlay's neglect in
leaving open the gate of the clover field, and Tom's inhuman
conduct in driving the sheep over the cliff.

I do not know how it fared with Thora when she reached Crua Breck,
but I was not long in doubt as to the result of her immersion in
the underground stream. The next morning I heard by accident that
she was ill in bed. For many long weeks she lay weary and helpless,
and it took all the skill of Dr. Linklater of Stromness to bring
her round to health again. During this time I heard nothing of her,
and much did I fear that her illness was very serious. One thing
that consoled me, however, was the thought that she had the
viking's talisman in her keeping, for in the excitement of seeing
the cart passing with the dead sheep, I had entirely forgotten to
ask her for the return of the stone, and she went into the house
with it still suspended from her neck. I was confident that she
would keep it in safety, and while she had it in her possession I
felt that her recovery to health was assured.



Chapter XXVIII. Captain Flett Of The "Falcon."


The unfortunate occurrence which deprived us of our little flock of
sheep brought an increase of sorrow and hardship to our family,
whose resources had already been so greatly impoverished; and when
the gloomy winter days came on, with their biting frosts and keen
cold winds, the prospects at Lyndardy grew as dull as the leaden
clouds that hung in the sky. Our mother's woeful sighs were painful
to my ears, while I felt how helpless I was to soften her sorrows.
Sometimes, when I saw the tears in her eyes, I would silently wish
for her sake that I was older and could do more towards filling my
father's place.

But work of the kind I was fitted for was scarce in Orkney. Had I
been able to choose for myself I should have been, like my father,
a pilot. But the chain of circumstances which had made this the
vocation of my family for three generations was now broken. Carver
Kinlay and his crew were having things all their own way, and in
the meantime I was doing that most trying of all work--waiting and
hoping for what seemed to become every day less probable.

But I did not pass my hours in idleness. Whenever an outward-bound
ship came into the harbour I sought her captain, and asked for a
berth aboard. Sometimes I would even walk as far as Kirkwall to see
if in that port I could get what was so difficult to procure in
Stromness.

One cold, wintry day, when the wind was blowing strong and cutting
from the north, I found myself in Kirkwall. Walking along the
wharf, looking down upon the decks of the vessels that lay against
the old stone quay--brigs, barques, and schooners, some of them
bound foreign, but most of them from Scotland--I came to a little
coasting schooner that I had often seen in the harbour of
Stromness. She was named the Falcon. I was looking down at the
green copper plating near her cutwater, when I heard a gruff but
cheery voice calling out:

"Hullo! there, young Ericson! Are ye not coming aboard, lad?"

"Hello, Davie!" I responded, jumping down upon the deck. "Here's a
cold day for ye, eh?"

He was a little, thick-set man, with a rippled, weatherbeaten face.
He wore a dirty, red, knitted cap, from which escaped a few curls
of iron-gray hair. A short pea jacket was closely buttoned over his
chest, and a pair of immense sea boots reached high above his
knees.

This was David Flett, the same jovial old mariner who, it will be
remembered, warned me against the Jew on Stromness quay. He removed
a short black pipe from his lips as I joined him near the
companionway.

"Have ye walked from Stromness the day?" he asked. "Ay, lad, but
ye'll be tired, I doubt. Come away below to the fire and warm
yersel'."

And he led the way down the ladder and into a close little cabin,
where a rousing wood fire was burning under a good pot of potatoes.

Captain Flett had spent most of his early days at the Greenland
whale fishing, but he had now settled down upon his own quarterdeck
to make a comfortable living for himself by helping others;
providing for the Orkney islanders, what they much needed, a market
of exchange for their native commodities.

The Falcon was called a cargo packet; but David Flett was a man of
singular enterprise, and styled himself a general merchant. He had,
indeed, become quite an important trader in his own way by
speculating in quantities of seemingly worthless goods, and
reserving them until time gave him a chance of disposing of them at
a profit.

If a farmer in Ronaldsay told him he was badly in want of a plough
or a pony the skipper would speedily find a farmer in another
island who had a plough or a pony to sell, and by thus bringing
buyer and seller together he made himself a friend to both. Nothing
was out of Flett's way. He had a genius for commerce. He would buy
an old anchor or a piece of sailcloth from someone in want of ready
money, and keep them in the hold of his schooner till he could find
a customer in some skipper whose anchor had been slipped or whose
sails were in need of repair. I believe he made it his business to
find out exactly what every person in Orkney was most in need of,
and straightway to set about getting it.

A Hoy crofter once said to his master (whether in jest or earnest I
know not):

"Eh, sir, but Flett's a wonderfu' man. I thought I had met wi' a
sore misfortune, twa months syne, when I lost both my cow and my
wife over the cliffs; but I went to Davie, and he has gotten me a
far better cow and a far bonnier wife."

David Flett's habits were well known to me, and on seeing the good
man's genial face I at once thought of a way in which he could be
of service to me. It is always well to have a friend in court. Why
should he not be asked to get me a berth on one of the outgoing
ships?

"Tak' a seat, now," said he, as he placed a stool for me in a warm
corner of the cabin. "Tak' a seat and tell us a' that's passing in
Stromness this while back, and then we'll get something to eat."

While he was asking questions and listening to my replies, I
quietly observed the miscellaneous contents of the cabin. A curious
place it was--half cabin and half shop. From the ceiling hung many
hams and pieces of bacon, smoked geese, pots and pans, bundles of
tallow candles, and strings of onions. On two shelves nailed
athwart the compartment were rows of canisters containing coffee,
tea, rice, and other luxuries and necessaries, besides bottles of
drugs, bars of soap, squares of salt, and other articles of
commerce, to be retailed to customers in the remote islands.

Presently a seaman, who was addressed as Jerry, came below and took
the potatoes from the fire, while the skipper drew a small table to
the middle of the floor and set it ready for dinner. The potatoes
were placed in a large dish in the centre of the table where we
could all reach them, and a joint of corned beef was added, with
plenty of oatcakes, cheese, and salt butter.

When all was ready for the meal the mate appeared, from I know not
where, and took his seat opposite the skipper, and I drew my stool
between them, while the man Jerry sat nearer the fire on an
upturned cask.

The mate, whose name was Peter Brown, was a red-faced little man
with a nose that had a decided list to the starboard, very untidy
in his dress, and given a bit to swearing, but a real good sort of
fellow, as I afterwards found, and a capital seaman. He had served
in English ships in the Baltic trade, but getting knocked about in
a storm rounding Cape Wrath, breaking his arm and his nose, he had
been put ashore at Kirkwall, where he had met with Captain Flett
and joined the Falcon, thirteen years before this time.

"And now, my lad," said Flett, blowing a hot potato that he held in
his horny hand, "what brings ye all the way to Kirkwall on a cold
day like this? Ye didna tell us that."

"Well, captain," I said, looking down at my platter and wondering
how I could eat its plentiful contents, hungry though I was, "I
just sauntered along to see if I could get some work. My mother's
sorely needin' help now, ye ken, since father was drowned, and I
maun be doing something."

"Ay, ye're right there, lad; ye're right there. But what kind o'
work were ye seekin'?"

"I carena what it be, if it's just work," I replied. "But I was
thinkin' I'd go in one o' the Kirkwall ships if there was one
wantin' a lad."

"Weel, that's just most amazing!" exclaimed Flett, dipping his hand
into the dish and bringing forth another steaming potato. "For our
lad, Jack, has taken a strange misliking to the Falcon, and run
away to a bigger ship.

"Jerry," he asked, turning to the seaman, "did ye hear onything o'
young Jack this mornin'?"

"Ay," said Jerry. "He sailed yestreen in the Foaming Wave, the lazy
rascal."

"We'll need a lad in his place then," said Peter. "Could Ericson
come aboard when we're round in Stromness?"

"Ye see, Ericson," said the skipper, looking kindly at me and
casting another slice of meat on my platter, "Ye see the Falcon's
but a wee slip o' a craft, considerin'. But maybe ye'd get along
wi' us weel enough till a better offers. So, if ye like, Jerry
here'll make up a bunk to ye, and I'll see that your mother, puir
soul, doesna want for onything. Sandy Ericson was a good man, as
everybody kens, and his widow maun be cared for."

Now this unexpected offer of employment was a thing that I had
reason to be very grateful for, as I did not neglect to show. While
wishing, with true Orcadian love of the sea, to sail for foreign
countries in one of the large vessels I had so often seen in the
haven of Stromness, I yet believed that there was no place in all
the world like the Orkney Islands--no cliffs so high, no sea so
blue, no homes so dear--and this new possibility of sailing with
Davie Flett in the Falcon among our own islands was more agreeable
to me, since it would not necessitate any very long absence from my
home, three weeks or a month being the usual extent of the voyage.

Before I left the schooner that afternoon, therefore, the matter
was fully arranged. The Falcon was to be round in Stromness Bay in
a few days' time, and I was then to join her.

Passing through Finstown on my way home, I was overtaken by Oliver
Gray's man in the inn gig. He gave me a lift as far as Stenness,
and thence I hurried to Lyndardy to tell my mother the joyful news.

For the next few days, whilst my mother and Jessie were occupied
with the business of providing some warm clothing for me, for use
on the cold nights at sea, and in other ways preparing for my
leaving, I sought to add to our stock of winter provisions by a
free use of my gun. The eider ducks, or dunter geese, as we call
them in Orkney, are always plentiful in the winter time, and
valuable not only for their flesh, but also for their rich downy
feathers, and I managed to procure a good number of these. Over at
the fresh-water loch of Harray, too, several teals and sheldrakes
were taken. And then, when my sport was over, I hung up my gun in
its place in the warm byre, believing that I was now a man.

So passed the time pleasantly and profitably until, much to my
satisfaction, the good ship Falcon arrived in the bay and dropped
anchor off the jetty.



Chapter XXIX. In Which The "Falcon" Sets Sail.


It was on a gray, wintry Saturday morning that we set sail on my
first Orcadian voyage. I had, you may be sure, been up at an early
hour, helping to load the little vessel with its miscellaneous
cargo, to be carried to the many indolent island ports at which our
skipper proposed calling. We were ready by about eight o'clock,
when I was sent ashore along with Jerry to get two or three letters
from the postmaster that had been waiting two weeks for the Falcon,
to be taken to some of the outlying islands; for the schooner, in
addition to her regular work, also carried the Queen's mails. Then,
aboard again, we weighed anchor, the harbour was cleared, and we
dropped below the Lookout Hill into the Sound.

It was a bitter cold morning, but my excitement on being outward
bound on my first trip was enough to keep me warm, and I paced the
deck proudly as we passed slowly into the broken water. Over the
brown slopes of Graemsay the late-rising sun struggled sleepily to
penetrate a dreamy haze; but soon his warmth had strength to melt
the white hoar frost from our rigging, and with a brisk breeze and
an outflowing tide we slipped through the Sound, dipping and rising
as we met the swelling waves of the outer sea. Then the great
headland of Hoy loomed into sight, its yellow and red cliffs
gleaming across the water as if sunshine always bathed them.

From the deck, as we sailed blithely along, I watched the billows
rolling landward and dashing upon the hard rocks, resounding with
thunderous noise among the hollow chasms. I was unwilling to go
below before we had passed beyond the sight of Stromness, but when
we were abreast of the Black Craigs I thought I would go down and
have a drop of hot coffee. I had no sooner got into the cabin,
however, when, what with the pitching of the schooner and the smell
of the cheese and bacon and other things, I began to feel a
sickening, so I went on deck again and busied myself as best I
could, though the skipper had told me he would not expect me to do
any work until I got my sea legs.

I soon fell into my simple duties, which were the more easy to me
since my acquaintance with ships and sailors in Stromness had given
me some slight knowledge of the routine work of a small craft.
Whenever the schooner was brought round on a new tack I was ready
to lend a hand with the ropes. I helped to keep trim the deck, and
even had the proud task of taking my trick at the tiller. When I
was well enough to venture below I had the duty of preparing the
meals, with the help of Jerry, who was man-of-all-work. But this
was not until we had been out some days.

On the first day I did little but hang about on deck, or sit on the
weather gunwale with Captain Flett. The old man was very kind to
me, and even put his pipe away lest the smell of the smoke should
make me feel sick.

One time, when we were so sitting together, I noticed an eagle rise
from a ravine in St. John's Head, and we watched the bird sailing
backward and forward on steady outstretched wing and finally
disappear amid the shadows of the Red Glen. This suggested a long
talk about the eagles that inhabited the solitudes of Hoy Island,
and the skipper told many a thrilling story of his own adventures
in search of eagles' nests in the time when rich rewards were
offered for every eagle killed.

At midday the Falcon was abreast of the Old Man of Hoy--a curious
isolated pinnacle of rock some five hundred feet in height standing
out in the sea--and before the time of sunset we rounded Rora Head
and entered a beautiful sheltered bay with a fine stretch of
sloping beach, beyond which, on the brown moor, about a dozen tiny
houses could be seen snugly nestling together beside a flowing
stream that had its source away up amongst the hills.

This was Rackwick, one of the chief hamlets of Hoy; and when the
schooner was brought well inshore the anchor was dropped. The
captain then ordered Jerry to blow the horn to announce our arrival
to the inhabitants far and near. Jerry thereupon took the fog horn
and blew it till the noise resounded and echoed for miles around.
Then we all went below to a meal of good Orkney herrings and hot
tea.

The meal was just finished, and the men were lighting their pipes,
when a boat from the shore was brought alongside--a heavy, clumsy
boat with great square oars pulled by two burly crofters.

When I went on deck with the skipper I found that our arrival at
Rackwick had been expected for some time.

"Man, Davie," interrogated one of the crofters in a broad Orkney
dialect, "where has thoo been wandering sae lang? They was
expecting thee mair than a twa week syne. Was thoo thinking o'
starving us all?"

"Starving you, Tam," returned Flett. "Nay, nay, lad, we'll see ye
dinna starve. Come aboard, lad, and let's know what you're needing.
We have everything you can want, from a needle to an anchor. So
just name it and you'll get it."

"We're needing none o' your anchors," said the crofter in a
matter-of-fact tone as he climbed up the schooner's side, "but I
just mind now, Mary Seater lost her last needle a week syne, and we
have but twa needles in all Rackwick, so thoo'd better gie us a
penny's worth."

Captain Flett told me to get the slate and pencil from below, and
as the crofter gave his orders for the articles required I wrote
these down under the initial item, "Needles, 1d."

When all the necessaries were brought together, they formed a
goodly pile of merchandise in the boat. Here were bags of potatoes
and of meal, a few loaves of bread, some tin cans and crockery,
pieces of cloth, and coils of rope and small parcels of groceries.
I went ashore in the boat to help the two men to unload her, and
when this was done there was the work of bringing back to the
Falcon what things were to be exported or given in exchange for
goods received.

When the last load was brought on board some ingenuity was required
to strike a just balance in the accounts, for in this primitive
community actual money, though well appreciated, was of less
consequence than money's worth, and the system of barter which
Captain Flett necessarily adopted was very difficult of adjustment.
However, my schooling was of some service to him in striking a
balance, and at nightfall the business was agreeably settled.

The next day was the Sabbath, and in the morning Captain Flett
appeared on deck dressed in his finest clothes of blue cloth, and
wearing a very respectable soft felt hat over his neatly-brushed
hair. The mate, Jerry, and I were also apparelled in our Sunday
best. After breakfast we went ashore in the dinghy, and the four of
us made our way in a body up to the Manse.

The room in which service was held was barely large enough to admit
so great an addition to its weekly congregation, but we were
permitted to take front seats near the chair occupied by the
minister, who thus was able not only to exchange occasional
civilities with the captain, but also to help himself to a frequent
pinch from the old man's snuffbox.

I remember I thought the service extremely wearisome, and I soon
grew tired of listening to the doctrinal discourse that was given
for our benefit. I found diversion in looking through a little
window behind the minister, and in observing the curious
contortions which were given to a cow browsing on the heath outside
whenever the animal passed a certain round knot in the glass.

Captain Flett remained ashore with the minister for the rest of the
day; and in the afternoon, when Peter was asleep in his bunk, Jerry
and I left the schooner and went for a walk across the hills. The
weather was not very inviting, for the wind blew in cold, cutting
gusts from the northwest, and there was little of interest to be
seen on the bleak, treeless waste. The coastline of Scotland was
hidden in mist, and even the crown of the Ward hi?^ll was covered
by the low-lying clouds. There would be little, indeed, to tell of
this walk were it not for an adventure that we encountered.

We had got round into the Red Glen, and were resting on a great
gray boulder. Everything was so quiet in the shelter of the hills
that even the birds seemed to recognize that it was Sunday. Not a
living thing was to be seen or a sound to be heard, except the
soughing of the wind and the trickling of a burn down the hillside.
Presently a loud screech rent the air, and a large eagle swooped
swiftly above us, carrying in its talons a rabbit or other small
animal. Flying in gradually narrowing circles, the bird at last
alighted among some rocks on the opposite side of the valley.

We ran as speedily as we could to where the eagle had dropped. To
our disappointment, however, the bird took wing and hovered high in
the air, but without its victim.

Continuing our way in search of the rabbit we saw a very curious
sight. In the midst of a number of loose stones someone had set a
trap, but had evidently neglected it. This neglect would have been
hard on any animals that might have been taken, as their probable
fate would be death by starvation. But what was probable did not
happen in this case. When we reached the trap we found in it a fine
golden eagle, alive and in splendid condition. Around him lay the
remains--the well-picked bones--of some twenty rabbits and as many
grouse which his mate had brought, and so saved him from a
lingering death.

The captive eagle, with its great beak dripping with the rabbit's
blood, flashed its bright round eyes and ruffled its feathers as
Jerry picked up a large stone and prepared to dash it at the bird's
head. Quick as might be, I arrested his uplifted arm.

"O, Jerry!" I pleaded; "dinna kill him, man. We have not so many
eagles as that. Give the bird his liberty."

Jerry dropped the stone, and looked at me with a kindly smile.

"Well, Ericson," he said, "you're maybe right. A dead eagle isna
much good after all. We'll let the bird fly."

Whilst Jerry attracted the attention of the eagle forward I went
behind, and, taking my knife from my pocket, I was proceeding to
open the jaws of the trap, when Jerry exclaimed, "Look out! look
out aft!" and before I understood his warning, I was thrown bodily
forward by a tremendous blow on my back.

The first eagle had watched our proceedings while on the wing, and
had flown to her mate's assistance, alighting on my back, at the
same time burying her talons in my woollen muffler. In my fall,
however, I liberated the captive eagle, which hopped about lamely
for a while, and then giving a kind of guttural chuckle, flapped
his wide wings, and rose gracefully into the air.

Jerry rushed forward to rescue me from the pecking beak of my
assailant. Fortunately the female bird, in her eagerness to follow
her mate, did not show fight when Jerry belaboured her with his
stick, but disentangled her claws from my muffler; at the same
time, giving me some severe scratches. Then she took to flight in
pursuit of her companion, and soon the pair of birds were seen
sailing side by side far up among the leaden clouds.

I was not seriously injured, and, so far from regretting that we
had not been victorious in the encounter, we were pleased at being
the means of restoring the captive bird to its noble mate.



Chapter XXX. An Orcadian Voyage.


Shortly after midnight, when I lay comfortably in my bunk, I was
awakened by hearing the anchor scraping and thumping against the
schooner's bow; then there was a hauling of ropes on deck and a
creaking of timbers as the sails were run up, and I fell to sleep
again before we had got out beyond the shelter of the coast.

When I got up in the morning and went on deck, the island of Hoy
lay far to windward like a bank of mist upon the sea. We were far
out on the broad Pentland Firth, plunging about on the rough water,
with our mainsail double-reefed, and the flying jib pulling away
like to split itself in the wind. I enjoyed it all for a time; but
when I went below to help Jerry to get ready some breakfast for the
skipper, the smell of the coffee and the frying bacon overcame me,
and I was forced to go back to my bunk, where I remained for the
rest of the day helplessly seasick.

The next morning, feeling better, I went up to get a breath of
fresh air, and found that we were hemmed in by a thick white mist
that crept round us, and rendered it difficult for Jerry, who was
on the lookout at the bow, to determine our course. We were making
for South Ronaldsay, and had been beating about all night, making
very little headway; and when the mist lifted before noon, it was
discovered that we had been driven down by the current, and had
come nigh to running into the black rocks of Stroma Island.

Here, where two strong streams met with terrific force, the
turbulent water whirled about with wild irregular motion, and we
were swept now one way, now another, until it seemed useless to
fight against the current that controlled us. We were, in fact, in
the midst of that dangerous vortex locally known as the Swelkie.
Those who know the secrets of the ocean currents of the northern
seas have their own scientific explanations to give; but our native
boatmen and sailors, who were not so well acquainted with the
eccentricities of the Gulf stream as with the popular legends of
Orkney, accounted for the Swelkie in this way:

A certain King Frodi had a magical quern, or hand mill, called
Grotti; the largest quern ever known in Denmark. Now Grotti, which
ground either gold or peace for King Frodi as he willed, was stolen
by a sea king named Mysing, who set the mill to grind white salt
for his ships. But it happened that Mysing had only learned the
spell to set the mill going, and knew not how to stop it. His
ships, therefore, became so full of salt that they sank, and Grotti
with them, before they could reach the islands of Orkney; hence the
Swelkie. This took place to the northwest of Stroma Island, and
ever since the sea there has not rested, for as the water falls
through the eye of the quern, it roars and rushes about, and the
quern goes on grinding and grinding salt, and giving its saltness
to the whole ocean.

The mist having lifted, Captain Flett had a reef or two let out,
and himself took the helm until he got us into calmer water, when
we luffed to the windward and headed for South Ronaldsay, with a
stiff breeze springing up that gave us a clear seaway to get past
the Lother Reef, when we sailed steadily through a lesser rush of
tide across a quiet, landlocked sea, into the little haven of
Burwick, where in the gathering darkness the chain went rattling
down, and we came to a restful anchorage.

But our stay at Burwick was not for long, as we had lost much time
in the outer sea, and the skipper wanted to get round to St.
Margaret's Hope. No sooner had we put a boatload of goods ashore
than we set sail again. And now that we were in smoother water, I
was not allowed to shirk my watch, but had to spend the better part
of the night on deck.

A little after midnight we were sailing under easy sail through the
dark Sound of Hoxa. I was at the helm, the mate walking the deck in
front of me. The night was extremely cold, and some light flakes of
snow were falling. I had difficulty in making out the points of
land as we passed, but Jerry was at the bow, and I depended upon
him and Peter for my steering. Just as we were abreast of Stanger
Head, on the little island of Flotta, I thought I saw a small
vessel creeping along, well inshore. I drew the mate's attention to
it, and he was denying me, when a bright flash of light was seen,
followed by a loud report, as of a small piece of ordnance. Peering
through the darkness, we could distinguish the sails of a large
cutter, which was now bearing down upon us.

"It's the Clasper," said Jerry, coming aft.

"Confound him!" said the mate. "Does she take us for a smuggler?"

From these words I at once understood the meaning of the shot that
had been fired; the revenue cutter had evidently mistaken the
Falcon for one of the famous smuggling craft of Scapa Flow.

We were at once hauled round, and a boat from the Clasper came
alongside. A sprightly young lieutenant climbed over our starboard
bulwarks, followed by a sailor who carried a large lantern. This
the officer took from him, and coming aft to where we all three
stood, he held the light aloft peering into our faces.

By this time our skipper came up from the cabin, rubbing his sleepy
eyes.

"What's all the row, Peter?" said he.

"Ah! Flett, it's you, eh?" said the lieutenant politely. "I'm sorry
to trouble you on such a cold night; I did not recognize your
schooner in the dark. But we have strict orders, you know. There's
a lot of it going on, and we must search you. A mere matter of
form, of course. You won't object?"

"Nay, I don't object, Mr. Fox. Search away," said David, turning to
go below.

A hurried search was made accordingly, but nothing suggesting
contraband traffic being discovered, the revenue men went away
perfectly satisfied, the lieutenant wishing us a goodnight, and
requesting us to keep the affair a secret when we arrived in
Stromness.

Early on the next day we touched at St. Margaret's Hope--one of the
chief fishing stations of Orkney--and our course thereafter lay
along the eastern shores of the Mainland.

Long and dreary was the passage northward from Ronaldsay to
Stronsay. The cold, frosty winds and weary, dark nights, made the
long watches on deck difficult to endure; but when my turn was
over, and I could get below to the fire, I generally forgot about
the hardships, and began to think that life at sea was really not
unpleasant.

Captain Flett tried to make my position comfortable and my work
agreeable, and sometimes when I was on deck with him at night, he
would remain by me smoking, and make the time pass lightly by
telling me of his early experiences in the Dundee whaling ships; or
more often he would instruct me in seamanship, and teach me
regarding the tides and channels of Orkney.

Thus during this voyage among the islands was the weariness of many
a night watch relieved. There was something to be told of almost
every place at which the Falcon touched. Often the talk would turn
upon the subject of wrecks, and of the wreckers who inhabited the
storm-swept islands, and were not above welcoming a shipwreck for
the sake of the valuable spoil they might procure.

Anchored off a little port in Sanday, David told me of a minister
who, while professing to deplore the frequency of shipwrecks on the
coast, ended a prayer by saying:

"Nevertheless, if it please Thee to cause helpless ships to be cast
on the shore, oh, dinna forget the poor island of Sanday."

We pursued our tortuous course as far north as a place called
Pierowall, in the island of Westray; when we found that there was
need to continue the voyage still further to Fair Isle, a little
island that lies about midway between Orkney and Shetland, for the
people in that place, we heard, had got short of winter provisions,
and our skipper would not hear of returning until he had supplied
the deficiency.

The weather became boisterous as we entered the open sea again, and
I had my first experience of really rough sailing. For two days the
schooner tossed upon the great white-crested waves which dashed
against her bows, broke in snowy foam upon the deck, and glistened
on oilskin and sou'wester. The wind whistled with piteous noise
among the ropes, and frequent showers of hail and sleet added to
our discomfort.

On the third day after leaving the Orkneys we sighted Fair Isle,
looming faintly through a mist of snow, far to starboard. With
difficulty we tacked to windward, for the northeast wind had driven
us considerably out of our course. Darkness came on at about three
o'clock in the afternoon in these latitudes, and we wanted to make
the harbour in daylight. But though the wind fell, the snow and
mist came on so thickly that we quite lost sight of the island, and
in our difficulty a terrible thing happened.

We were all hands on deck, and sailing close-hauled with a good
stretch of canvas set. I was at the helm, and the skipper standing
near me. Jerry and the mate were nailing some boards on the
companion hatch to keep out the snow from the cabin. Suddenly the
schooner gave a great lurch and fell off the wind. The mainsail
flapped wildly for a moment, and as we luffed again we went over
with a list that swung the boom back with such force that the ropes
that held it were slipped, and the spar struck the skipper a blow
upon the shoulder that sent him headlong overboard into the sea.

Jerry and the mate saw the accident, and while I still held the
tiller hard a-port, they at once got out the boat. Jerry and Peter
each took an oar and rowed quickly astern to where Captain Flett
was swimming.

It will be easily understood that, left to myself, I could not
manage the schooner with much skill; for, in the first place, I
could not without help bring the sails over on the other tack, and
in the second I could not well leave the helm. Indeed, I had the
greatest difficulty in hauling the vessel round, and before I
succeeded in doing anything beyond simply putting the helm a-port,
the driving snow had surrounded me in its mist, and I lost sight of
the boat.

I could see it nowhere. I called aloud, but the wind whistling in
the ropes overpowered my voice. I left the tiller and got the fog
horn. But, alas! I had never practised blowing that instrument, and
try as I would, I could get no more than a feeble grunt out of it.

Thicker and thicker grew the mist, and the snow fell in numerous
and heavy flakes. Darkness came on, and still never a boat could I
see, never a sound could I hear but the ceaseless swish of the snow
and the soughing of the wind. The schooner pitched and rolled
helplessly on the waves, and I was in terror lest the sails should
split in their mad flapping.

I tried to secure the heavy boom that had been the cause of this
mischief, and after a long struggle with it I succeeded. Then I
went below and lighted the lamps, and having fixed them in their
places so that they might be seen from the boat I made another
attempt to bring the vessel round on the starboard tack and keep
her to the windward.

All through that long dark night I beat about on the rough sea with
the snow driving cold and sharp upon me, and the waves breaking on
the deck. I was tired and sleepy after a hard day's work, yet I
could not think of this, nor of my hunger and my cold hands and
feet. My only object now was to recover my messmates, and as the
night wore on without my seeing any sign of them, I grew utterly
hopeless, for they were without food and far from land, and God
alone knew what had become of them.

From my despair at the probable fate of the boat, however, I
gradually realized the fact that my own condition was not without
peril. Here was I, a slip of a lad, alone and helpless, out in the
open sea, in a schooner that three men could only with difficulty
manage. I had but small skill in seamanship. I knew almost nothing
of my whereabouts, and, added to these disadvantages, I had the
physical discomforts to endure of fatigue, hunger, and cold.

At about nine o'clock I went below to get something to eat. The
fire was out, so I could not make any coffee; but there was a
bottle of spirits in the locker, and fancying this might do me good
I, for the first time in my life, drank some. I at once felt much
warmer, and I took half a glassful with some water and drank it
with the oatcake and cold bacon that I ate.

Going on deck again, I felt much more comfortable; but the spirits
that had warmed my vitals soon had an effect upon me that I had not
counted upon. My eyesight became hazy, and I felt terribly
sleepy--so sleepy that I could not remain at the helm for fear of
falling into a slumber at my post. So I tied up the tiller, and,
for the rest of the night, walked the deck, only altering the
schooner's course when I thought that she was being driven too far
from the spot where the boat had put off.

All the night through I peered over the dark sea, and at intervals
raised my voice, in the faint hope of coming across the boat. But
for all the lookout that I kept, never a boat could I see; and for
all my shouting, never a response to my cries could I hear.
Whatever had become of the skipper--whether he had been picked up
or was drowned--the mate and Jerry were gone, and I, the youngest
of the crew, was left alone on the Falcon to bring her back to
port, if haply I was not taken by her across the dreary waste of
ocean to some terrible and unknown destiny.



Chapter XXXI. An Arctic Waif.


When the dim light of dawn fell upon the sea I looked over the gray
waters through the telescope. The mist had faded away, and the snow
had ceased to fall. A fresh breeze from the low east brought a
faint glimmer of sunshine with it. But though I searched the
horizon, and the wide intervening space of sea, yet could I
discover nothing of the boat, and Fair Isle was nowhere to be seen.

Looking for that island--which I knew to be the nearest land--I
remembered the islanders and thought how little chance there now
remained of the Falcon rendering them assistance in their need of
provisions. I saw no possibility of reaching Fair Isle; for, as I
had seen it on the previous day, it appeared but a small rock; and
being out of all my reckoning, and, as I supposed, a considerable
distance to leeward, I did not think it wise to waste much time in
the vain effort to reach the island, the exact position of which I
was ignorant of. I might have beat about for two or three days,
perhaps, without sighting it, and yet I knew not what other land to
make for.

The wind, which was now blowing east-southeast, was unfavourable in
an attempt to make for the Orkneys. The only alternative that I
could see, therefore, was to head the schooner round on the port
tack and bear northward to the Shetlands.

I went below to look at the chart to determine my position and the
course I should take; and, to prepare myself for difficulties I
foresaw, I lighted a fire and made myself some coffee and cooked
some bacon for breakfast. When I had eaten a good meal and warmed
myself, a drowsiness came over me again, and I threw myself on the
skipper's bed to rest for a little while.

I must have slept very soundly; for when I awoke the fire was out,
and I saw by the chronometer that it was nearly eleven o'clock. But
my sleep had done me great good, and I hurried on deck and looked
round.

The schooner was labouring aimlessly for the want of the helm to
guide her and keep her on her course; but soon I brought her to
again and she went scudding along bravely. I made no doubt that at
the rate she was sailing I should sight Sumburgh Head early the
next morning.

What troubled me most was that she appeared to be making a good
deal of leeway. This was my one danger, for if I should be taken so
much to leeward as to miss the southern point of the Shetland
Mainland, then I should lose my chance of making Lerwick. Thus I
might possibly be driven northward beyond the islands, and so find
myself in a worse plight than if I had tried to regain the Orkneys.

The sight of a few fishing smacks on the far east inspired me with
renewed hope. They were making north, but they were too far away
for me to signal them. As a precaution, however, I hoisted a signal
of distress in case any passing ship should see the Falcon whilst I
was below or asleep at any time. But this was of no avail as it
happened, for all the rest of that day I saw not another sail.

The next night was spent in weariness on deck, with a cold rain
falling. I managed to keep awake without much difficulty, for I did
not take any more spirits, but had a can of hot coffee beside me at
the tiller, and went below several times to keep the fire alight
and the kettle on the boil. At about midnight I saw a ship's light
to windward, but it soon dropped below the horizon. It showed me
that I was still on the sea track between Orkney and Shetland, and
I kept a sharp lookout towards morning for the Sumburgh light.

Day broke with a haze over the water and a cloudy sky. The wind
shifted to the northeast, bringing snow. At midday the wind was due
north, and several inches of snow lay on the schooner's deck. I
boiled some potatoes for my dinner, and thought that I had
something to be thankful for in having a good store of provisions
on board. I was beginning to think that I should need them, for I
had not yet sighted the land.

Again the night came, and still I had seen no more sails. I had
seen no land. The rays of the Sumburgh light never reached the poor
Falcon. I felt that I was drifting to westward, being carried away
in the grip of one of those mysterious ocean currents that are the
terror of the northern latitudes.

On the fourth day of my lonely voyage I was oppressed by a deep
sense of the danger of my situation. I realized that I had missed
the Shetlands; that I could now do no more than abandon myself to
the will of the wind, and trust to falling in with some vessel that
might be making for the Faroe Islands or for Iceland. If I had had
a companion to take watch about with me I might have got along
fairly well; but with my hard work of trimming the sails, and
battling with the fitful winds, I could not do without sleep, and
during my hours of sleep the schooner always fell off her course,
and I could make no reckoning.

Day followed day, and my situation underwent no visible change,
excepting only that the temperature became ever colder and colder,
that the snow fell more constantly, and that the mist hemmed me in
more closely. Sometimes at midday the mist would lift and I saw
around me the great wide stretch of desolate sea, with an ice floe
floating here and there. On one such occasion I fancied I saw land
on the windward bow, a white mountainous peak rose high in air,
and, not knowing where I might be, I took it to be one of the
joekulls of Iceland. But, alas! it proved to be but an immense
iceberg.

In my solitude I naturally thought much of my home, now so far
away, and of my dear mother and sister, and their prayers for my
safety. For their sakes I dreaded to think that I might never
return to them again.

I thought, too, of Thora, and wondered many times if she was
better, or if her illness had taken her away.

I had before found comfort in the thought that she was protected by
the viking's stone. But, probably, I now needed its mystic help
even more than she.

One afternoon--I think it must have been about the twentieth day of
my loneliness--I had been asleep for some three hours, and in a
kind of waking dream I saw a strange vague vision. A number of
persons, whose faces I could not rightly discern, were in a large
room. Amongst them was Thora, looking more beautiful than I had
ever seen her in my life, and she stood pointing with an accusing
finger at her brother Tom, at whose feet there crouched a lean dog,
snarling at him.

I was awakened from my half sleep by the noise of a crackling and
scraping of ice upon the schooner's sides. I had seen many floating
pieces of ice during the past few days, but this, from the noise it
made, seemed to be an unusually large piece. I feared it might even
be an iceberg, and I hastened up on deck.

I shall never forget the sight that greeted me.

The whole sky was aglow with the light of the aurora borealis--or
the Merry Dancers, as we call the phenomenon in Orkney. A beautiful
crimson curtain, fringed with flickering streamers, spanned the
northern sky. From east to west there passed a succession of
trembling waves of light, many coloured, from faint rose to palest
yellow and delicate green. A heavy cloud of inky blackness hung
high above, and from its upper margin rays of fiery light flashed
far across the sky, casting their reflections upon the sea.

Two ghostly icebergs, floating about a mile apart, reared their
snowy peaks on high, and in the channel between them--most welcome
sight of all--there sailed a ship.

The vessel's sails were hanging stiff about the spars and her
timbers were coated with ice and snow. I steered the schooner
towards her, and we slowly approached. When I was near enough I
hailed her and waited, listening for an answer to my call. No
answer came.

A feeling of awe crept over me. There was something strangely
desolate about her. No hand seemed to be guiding her helm. Not a
man was to be seen on her snow-covered decks. She sailed aimlessly
along, as though all on board had ceased to care when or how she
reached her destination.

I brought the schooner close in to the stranger's side until we
touched, and then I got the large boat hook out and fixed it in her
chains. None of the ship's crew appeared to have remarked my
approach. What could they be doing? Perhaps, I thought, they were
all below decks.

I climbed upon the Falcon's gunwale and looked through an open
porthole into the vessel's after cabin. I saw there a man seated at
a table, with his back towards me, apparently writing.

"Hello in there! D'ye keep no watch aboard?" I cried.

He appeared not to hear me, but held the pen in his hand as though
in deep meditation.

I clambered up the vessel's side and got over the quarter rail,
taking with me the end of a stout rope with which to secure the two
ships together. The snow was deep on the stranger's decks, and bore
no trace of footsteps. All was quiet. .

I crossed over to the companion ladder, and found my way down to
the door of the cabin. I knocked with my knuckles, but no voice
answered, and I went within. The man still sat at the table,
without turning at my entrance. The atmosphere was cold and musty;
there was no fire in the stove, although yet another man sat
crouched before it. I went behind the man at the table and touched
him on the shoulder.

"D'ye not hear me, sir?" I said. "Are ye deaf? or what has gone
wrong?"

He did not move.

I looked down into his face.

"Heavens!" I exclaimed, drawing back in horror at the grim sight.

What did it mean? I made bold to look again, though I felt myself
trembling. A green damp mould covered his cheek and forehead, and
hung in a ghastly fringe over his open eyes. The man was a frozen
corpse!

Terrified at the sight, I fled up the stairs with my heart wildly
beating. Regaining the deck I looked about me, but there was no
sign of life anywhere on the ship. Afraid to make any further
search, I clambered down into the Falcon and rushed below. I cast
myself before the fire, trembling and unable to realize anything
for the mortal fear that was upon me. I tried to forget the sight
of that face of death, with its horribly grim and mouldy features,
but it haunted me with terrible clearness.

I roused up my fire and made some strong tea, and, drinking it, I
wondered why I had not thought of pushing off the schooner from
this death ship. It was now growing dark, and the thought of
spending a whole night alone in the near presence of dead men,
whose ghosts, for all I knew, might visit me, filled my mind with
strange and awful fancies. Even the sound of the wind whispering in
the ropes struck me with nervous fear. But the drink of tea and
what little I ate helped to revive my spirits, and gradually my
sense of awe was overcome by a curiosity that came upon me--a
curiosity to go aboard the vessel again and discover something more
of her singular condition.

It was now wearing on towards night and I trimmed my lamps.
Lighting a small lantern, I carried it with me on deck. I made the
two vessels still more secure by means of a hawser rope, and then
went aboard the barque. As I began to climb up her side I was
conscious that she seemed to be deeper in the water than she had
been when I came alongside of her, but the discovery did not at the
moment trouble me.

I carried my lantern across her quarterdeck, and with timid steps
again descended into the after cabin. The lantern shed a ghostly
light upon the figure of the man at the table. I walked round to
the opposite side from that at which he sat and turned the light
upon his face. His long beard was overgrown with the same green
mould that hung over his glassy blue eyes, and yet there was a look
of life about his features.

I chanced to look at the ink pot in front of him. A little black
dust was all that it contained. Then I had a wish to see what he
had been writing in his log book. I drew the volume towards me and
turned it that I might read. The words were in English; they seemed
to have been written by a cold and trembling hand. The last lines
on the open page were in themselves a revelation. They were as
follows:

"It is now seventeen days since we were shut up in the ice. The
fire went out yesterday, and our captain has since tried to light
it again. His wife died this morning. There is no more hope."

I pondered over these words for some time, trying to realize their
sad meaning.

"There is no more hope!"

How long since had that sentence been written? How long had the ice
imprisoned this vessel in its cold, hard grip?

I turned back a few pages in search of some recorded date, and
found this entry:

"New Year's Day, 1831:--The ice still closing in on us. Opened last
bag of biscuits. Murray died this morning."

So long ago! the year 1831! and now it was the year 1844! The ship,
then, had been lost for thirteen years!

I turned the light upon the man crouching over the stove. His
features, like those of his companion, were covered with green
mould, and his beard was fringed with the same grim mildew.

Taking my lantern I went through into the stateroom, and there I
found the body of a woman laid upon a bed. Her features were still
fresh and lifelike, but her black hair was powdered with the damp
green growth. Before her a young man was seated on the floor,
holding a flint in one hand and a steel in the other. A few sticks
of hard wood were piled up in front of him. I could but surmise
that these were the captain and his wife.

From the stateroom I turned into the pantry. Not a sign of
provisions of any sort could I discover, either here or in any
other part of the ship. The galley fireplace was empty of fuel, a
few pieces of charred wood were the only remains of a fire.

Before leaving the ship I went forward into the fore cabin. A dog
was stretched out as though asleep at the foot of the ladder, and
several sailors lay in their hammocks. They also were reposing in
the sleep of death. They all appeared to have died very peacefully;
but whether from the want of food alone or, as I have since thought
possible, from want of air, being shut up in the heart of an
iceberg, I had no means of knowing.

I did not further continue my search of the vessel that night, but
went on board the Falcon, feeling sick and nervous. I could eat
nothing; but having taken a drink of hot coffee, I sat before a
good fire, thinking over what I had just seen, and planning what I
should do.

If any one of those poor men could, in his dire need, have had a
drink of my coffee, or a spoonful of the good porridge I had made
but could not myself eat, heavens! how he would have relished it!
Here was I, with a schooner well loaded with provisions. Some
strange fate had brought me to this ship. But all that I could have
supplied was useless to the sufferers now. They had perished of
starvation and cold, and my food and fire were of no avail, for I
had come thirteen years too late!



Chapter XXXII. The Last Of The "Pilgrim."


I could sleep but little during that long and wearying night.
Terrible thoughts haunted me--thoughts of my own peril and
loneliness, thoughts of the dead men that I had seen. Before
daybreak I was on deck, and in the dim light I noticed that the ice
which had been so scattered over the sea for the past few days had
almost disappeared.

At daylight, looking overboard at the hull of the dread ship
alongside, I observed two things. The first was that we were
drifting perceptibly southward; this was satisfactory. The second
was that the larger vessel had sunk at least a couple of inches
deeper in the water; this was alarming.

Now that it was daylight I was able to read the ship's name at her
stern, though I had first to knock away a quantity of ice and snow
from above the letters. I found that she was the Pilgrim of
Bristol. I had before perceived that she was not a whaler, nor did
she appear to have been fitted out for an Arctic voyage. I
marvelled much what had brought her to these seas, and whither she
had been bound, and what her cargo was.

More than all did I wonder what I was to do with her. Here was I,
placed by strange circumstances in command of two vessels, a
schooner and a barque, and without the power or skill to take
either of them into port--not knowing, indeed, where a port could
be found. Had Davie Flett, Peter, and Jerry still been with me on
the Falcon, we might have taken the Pilgrim to Stromness; we might
also have given to her crew, or what remained of them, the decent
burial for which they had waited so long. But, as things stood, I
should have been thankful if I could have simply foreseen the
possibility of getting out of my position of difficulty, regardless
of either vessel. The sight of those dead bodies on the Pilgrim had
made me utterly downcast. Their terrible fate had suggested to me
the uncertainty of my own.

When I had taken some breakfast, I again went aboard the Pilgrim. I
discovered that her cargo consisted for the most part of sulphur.
Now, sulphur I knew to be a product of Iceland, and I judged from
this that the ship had touched at that northern island.

I went into the chart room. A couple of charts were spread out on a
couch. One of them was a chart of the north of Scotland, including
the Orkney and Shetland Islands; the second was a continuation of
the first, and gave the whole coast of Iceland and the sea beyond
as high as the seventy-seventh degree of north latitude. The ship's
course was clearly traced upon the charts in lines of red ink, and,
following it, I could see that the Pilgrim (sailing, I suppose,
from Bristol or some other English port) had rounded Cape Wrath and
gone in at Kirkwall, in the Orkneys; thence the course was
continued in a regular zigzag northward to a port on the north of
Iceland, and then due east, as though she had been making for
Scandinavia. But here the line became broken and irregular, and
swept round suddenly to the far northwest, as though the vessel had
been carried away by some adverse current or contrary wind away
into the Arctic seas.

Here, then, I had a rough sort of explanation of the Pilgrim's
voyage.

I was leaving the captain's room, taking the charts with me, when,
on giving a last look round, I noticed a sleeping berth curtained
off by a plaid shawl. I drew the curtain aside, and saw something
sparkling. It was a beautiful diamond ring that encircled one of
the fingers of a man's thin white hand. The hand was clasped over
some small object that I did not see. Turning down a heavy fur rug
that covered the man's dead body I noticed that his clothing, his
appearance generally, were not those of a seaman. He had a long,
silky, brown beard, and a very handsome face, which, however, was
marred by an ugly scar on the brow. I judged him to be about
thirty-five years old. Lying on his breast was a thick notebook,
which, on opening the pages, I found to be filled with writing in a
foreign language.

Turning from the bed place I was again attracted by the man's
sparkling ring. I gently opened the hand and drew the ring from the
thin finger, and as I did so a small gold locket dropped from the
hand. It contained the painted portrait of a very beautiful girl
with fair hair and fine blue eyes. I looked in strange admiration
at the face. It had probably been the last object the dead man had
seen. With a feeling of reverence I put the locket back into his
hand. But with feelings that were less reverent I placed the
diamond ring on my own finger, and took possession of the notebook.
These, with the charts and the log book of the man in the after
cabin, I carried on board the Falcon.

That afternoon I chanced to look overboard at the Pilgrim's
waterline. She had sunk at least three more inches. I felt that,
whatever happened to myself and the schooner, the Pilgrim at least
would never again reach port, and I determined to save from the
vessel what articles might be of use to me in case I should be able
to return to land. I therefore went on board again and took
possession of the ship's papers, some firearms and cabin furniture,
a number of English books, and a small chest that I found in the
captain's room.

The wind had fallen almost to a dead calm very soon after I had
come alongside the Pilgrim, and I had thus been able to keep the
two vessels together without any difficulty. But that afternoon as
I sat before my fire reading a book on navigation--that part of it
relating to the art of taking an observation on the sun, moon, and
stars--the schooner listed over to larboard, as though the wind had
caught her sails. I rushed up on deck and found that a strong
breeze was blowing from the northwest, and was filling the sails of
both vessels. The Pilgrim, indeed, was sailing with considerable
speed, dragging the schooner along with her.

I ran forward and cast off the rope that held us together. Not too
soon, for the barque was leaning over on her port side and visibly
settling down.

As speedily as I could I trimmed the schooner's sails and got her
free. She took the wind bravely, and I left the Pilgrim to leeward.
I watched her struggling on the gradually rising waves as she
tossed about aimlessly for the space of about half an hour. Then I
saw her bows dip deep into the water and her stern rise high,
while, with a heavy plunge and a surging sound that came to me like
a melancholy groan, she disappeared, carrying her lifeless crew
with her to that tomb for which they had waited so long.



Chapter XXXIII. The Light In The Gaulton Cave.


The favourable breeze from the northwest continued with little
variation for several days after the foundering of the Pilgrim, and
I kept the schooner on the one tack, sailing before the wind, with
the tiller often tied up for many hours together without my needing
to touch it. I contrived, after many failures, to take an
observation on the second day, for the sky was then clear, and I
had all the necessary appliances excepting only the skill to use
the quadrant with a seaman's confidence. I made out that I was to
the northwest of the Faroe Islands, and I made no doubt that I
should sight one of that group in the course of that same day or
the day after.

But such was not to be my good luck. For eight full days and nights
I kept on the same course, with a dull, leaden sky above and a mist
creeping over the sea, and never a bit of land could I discover,
nor any light, whether of beacon or of ship.

On the twelfth day after the sinking of the Pilgrim, however, I
saw, to my great joy, a strip of land on the southeastern horizon.
I had not the slightest notion whether it belonged to the Faroe or
to the Shetland islands, but I fancied it might be the latter. It
was a small island with a high rocky coast, and a vast number of
sea fowl flying about and above it.

I was some six miles from the island when I noticed a brown-sailed
fishing smack bearing out towards me. As the boat came near enough
I hailed it. Two men were aboard, and they answered me in good
Orkney dialect. They dropped alongside of the Falcon, and I threw
them a rope's end.

My first question was to ask them the name of this island. What joy
it was to me to hear once more a human voice, to see a fresh and
rosy face!

"It's the Fair Isle," said one of them. "We thought you was lost.
Where have you been, my lad, all this while past since Davie Flett
fell owerboard?"

"What!" I asked, "did Davie come ashore?"

"Ay, did he," said the fisherman; "he was picked up by his own
boat, and they brought him ashore here the next morning. We sent
three luggers out to seek you yourself, when we heard that you were
aboard the Falcon alone, but they could find you nowhere."

The men brought their boat astern and came aboard. I asked them
further about Captain Flett, and learned that he, with the mate and
Jerry, had only the evening before gone back to Orkney in a
Kirkwall fishing sloop.

The two Fair Islanders then helped me to take the Falcon into their
small landlocked haven, where, having supplied the good people with
an abundance of provisions, I engaged the services of three
fishermen to help me with the schooner back to Stromness, and on
the morning following we set sail.

It was well that I got this timely assistance, and that I was not
suffered to remain any longer alone on the Falcon, for on leaving
Fair Isle we encountered boisterous weather. For two days we were
tossed about on the great, white-crested waves of the open sea, and
frequent showers of hail and sleet added to our discomfort. The
storm abated somewhat as the rocky shores of Pomona hove in sight,
and soon the familiar bay of Skaill and the cliffs of my native
parish seaboard showed me that the voyage was approaching a welcome
end.

It was evening when the schooner passed abreast of the rocks of
Yeskenaby, and now I watched eagerly for the light in the windows
of Lyndardy farm. As I looked landward, however, I observed
something through the growing darkness that excited considerable
wonder in my mind. Low down in the North Gaulton cliffs I noticed a
peculiar hazy light. Presently it grew brighter and developed into
a flickering flame and then disappeared. The light was not seen by
any of my crew; but from its position I judged that it proceeded
from a torch which someone was using in that cave in the cliff
wherein Thora and I had met with our adventure some weeks before.



Chapter XXXIV. Colin Lothian Makes An Accusation.


When I went ashore at Stromness I found that Captain Flett, who had
landed in Orkney three or four days before me, had not yet come
over from Kirkwall; so next morning I paid off my three Fair
Islanders, who went over by land to Kirkwall, intending to return
to their home by the sloop that had brought my skipper and
shipmates.

I saw the schooner safely moored in the bay, with her cabin door
locked and her hatchway closed, and then went up home to Lyndardy.
My mother and Jessie had already heard that the Falcon had come
into the harbour; they gave me a very warm welcome from this my
first voyage, and listened with interest and surprise to the things
I had to tell them.

On my way through the town the following morning I chanced to meet
my old schoolmaster, who walked along with me as far as the quay.
He had two things that he wished to tell me: the one being that his
written account of Jarl Haffling's remains had been read before the
Society of Antiquaries in Edinburgh, and was to be printed in the
Society's Transactions; the other matter being that proceedings
were, he believed, very soon to be taken against Tom Kinlay for
having appropriated a part of the viking's treasure.

When we had spoken of these matters, there was much for me to tell
the dominie; but as it was too cold for us to stand on the quay, I
took him with me aboard the schooner, where I had some advice to
ask him regarding my course in reporting the loss of the Pilgrim to
the underwriters. Seated in the cabin I told him my adventure, and
showed him all the books and papers I had taken from the barque
before she went down. He gave me what simple instruction I
required, and offered to help me in preparing my report for Lloyd's
agent. With this purpose in view I permitted Mr. Drever to take the
log book ashore with him, as well as the little chest that I had
taken from the captain's room on board the Pilgrim.

I was pushing off from the pier, having put the dominie ashore,
when I heard myself called, and there, at the head of the piers
stood my skipper, Davie Flett, newly arrived from Kirkwall. How
thankful I was to see his familiar stumpy figure again I need not
say.

He was coming down towards me when Carver Kinlay accosted him, and
kept him in conversation. But I approached the two men, taking
Flett by the hand.

He gave little notice to me beyond a very ordinary greeting; but I
saw by his eyes that he was glad enough to see me, only that he
probably had some business to talk over with the pilot. I stood by
them, wishing they would be done.

"And how's business in the islands, Davie?" said Kinlay in an
offhand tone.

"Fairly weel! fairly weel!" said the captain. "Nothing to complain
o', ye ken."

"Ay, I see!" said Carver; "no sae weel but ye might do better, eh?
I'm thinkin', Davie, ye need to open up a new line o' business
among the crofters."

"Ah! and what business is that, pilot?" asked Flett.

"Oh, I dinna just ken that, but ye canna aye sail on the same tack.
Now, supposin', for instance, ye were to start something in the
liquor line. Ye have grand facilities for that, have ye not?"

"I'll not deny that I have the facilities," observed Flett, with a
curious twinkle in his eye. "But ye see, pilot, there's no demand
for liquor in the islands. What for would I tak' spirits to the
crofters when the poor folk canna more than pay for their
bannocks?"

"Why, man alive, ye can surely make a demand? Just carry a good
supply of spirits in yer schooner, and I warrant ye'll do a grand
trade."

"Ye're maybe no far wrang there," said Davie thoughtfully. "But
then, there's another difficulty, pilot; where will the spirits
come from?"

"Why, man," said Kinlay, lowering his voice, "that's just the
simplest part o' the whole business. Think ye that no whisky comes
into Stromness forbye what gangs to Oliver Gray's? Why, man, if it
came to that, I could undertake to supply ye mysel' on the most
easy terms."

"Ay, like enough," returned Flett, with a look in his face that
Carver did not observe. "Like enough--excise paid, of course?"

"Oh! we needna say anything about the excise, Davie," said the
pilot, looking uneasy. "What does't matter about the excise?"

Davie Flett quietly stroked his bristly chin, saying:

"Weel, Carver Kinlay, it's the first time I have heard of a pilot
having a hand in that business. But, no doubt, a pilot has grand
facilities. However that may be, I'm not sure that the Orkney
crofters would welcome such a new line of business. Anyway, I have
more respect for the crofters and for their poor families than to
think of starting such a damnable traffic; nor am I in the least
disposed to turn a schooner of mine into a floating grog shop. Good
morning, pilot!"

Kinlay winced visibly under this taunting speech of the trading
captain. Evidently he had mistaken his man in supposing that Flett
would descend to his own level, and aid in promoting the nefarious
traffic he suggested. Davie Flett's intimate knowledge of the
Orcadians, and the nature of his commerce with them, would
certainly have made it easy for him to do a considerable retail
trade. But, as I well knew, the skipper of the Falcon had
systematically avoided including spirits in his stock of marketable
commodities. Though himself no enemy to an occasional dram on a
cold night, he knew too well the evil effects that would probably
follow the introduction of strong drink among the innocent
islanders, who, for the most part, had the greatest difficulty in
gaining a simple livelihood. Even apart from his moral scruples,
Davie Flett had excellent reasons for rejecting Kinlay's singular
proposal.

One thing that I gathered from this conversation was the suspicion
that Carver, who had often posed as a very innocent man, was,
either directly or indirectly, in league with the smugglers of
Scapa Flow. That could be the only way in which he could obtain
spirits or other illicit goods at a lower rate than through the
ordinary channels of commerce; and the pilot's evasion of the
question regarding excise almost confirmed my suspicions.

Kinlay walked slowly away, and when he had disappeared, Davie Flett
turned round to me with open arms as though he would embrace me.

"Halcro, my lad," said he, "I am real glad to see you. Thank the
Lord ye're safe!"

"I might say the same to you, captain," said I. "How were ye
rescued, and where are Peter and Jerry?"

"Peter and Jerry are at Oliver Gray's," he answered. "Come, let us
join them. As for mysel', why, there's nothing much to tell. I was
picked up by the boat ten minutes after I dropped owerboard. We
searched about for you all night. But ye mind what a mist was ower
the sea. It was no wonder we lost sight of the schooner. But ye're
safe, and that's a blessing."

The skipper then began to ask me a multitude of questions
concerning the behaviour of the schooner. But we were now passing
through the narrow street and I was interrupted; for we overtook
old Colin Lothian, the wandering beggar, who was trudging along
over the frost-covered stones with his dog at his heels.

"Weel, Colin, auld crony," exclaimed the skipper as we came
alongside the old man, "you're aye travelling. Think you we're to
have some more snow?"

"Nay, captain, I dinna think it; the wind's ower high for that,"
the wanderer replied, looking up at the dull sky above Gray's
signboard.

"Then if it isna snow it'll be a night o' hard frost," said the
skipper. "Will ye come in and take something to warm ye, Colin?"

And Colin silently complied.

Entering the inn we found a goodly number of men gathered round the
cosy stove with steaming glasses before them. Most of them were men
of Pomona; but I noticed also a young man who sat somewhat apart
from the rest, and in him, despite the absence of naval uniform, I
had little difficulty in recognizing Lieutenant Fox of the Clasper,
who had boarded the Falcon some weeks before in the Sound of Hoxa.

Then, too, there were Peter and Jerry, both of whom welcomed me
with many words of kindness, and made room for me beside them.

Captain Flett ordered Oliver to bring in a glass of hot rum for
himself, and two mugs of coffee for Lothian and me; and we had not
been seated long before Peter Brown inquired of me the particulars
of my solitary voyage in the Falcon. At first very few of the men
paid much attention to my narrative, but when I came to the
discovery of the ship that had been imprisoned in the ice, and told
about the man I saw through the porthole, they all drew their
chairs nearer to me and listened with rapt attention. When I spoke
about the dead captain's wife, and said that her features were
still lifelike, there was a murmur of incredulity; none of the men
would believe that I was not romancing. But the young lieutenant
here interposed.

"Let the lad go on with his yarn," he said. "Believe me it's quite
possible that the woman's face should show no signs of death. I
have known frost and ice preserve a dead body for many months."

With that they were quieted. But again, when I spoke of the log
book and said that the ship had been enclosed in the ice for
thirteen years, even the lieutenant seemed to disbelieve me.

"Thirteen years!" he exclaimed. "Come now, come, draw it mild, my
lad, that won't do at all, you've mistaken the writing somehow.
Show us the log book and then we'll believe it."

"I'm sure I did not mistake, sir," I protested, "for the writing
was as plain as plain could be,

"'New Year's Day, 1831. The ice still closing in on us. Opened last
bag of biscuits. Murray died this morning.'

"These were the very words, and I'll show you them if--"

Here I felt a trembling hand clasped on my knee, and Peter asked
excitedly, "What name did you say? Was it Murray?"

"Murray! yes, that was the man who died on New Year's Day."

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Peter. "Tell me, what was the name of the
ship? Did you not find that out?"

"Why, yes, Peter, I saw her name. She was called the Pilgrim--of
Bristol."

Peter became excited, and a strange pallor came over his face.

"Why, what's come ower you, Peter?" asked Captain Flett. "D'ye know
the craft?"

"Know her!" said Peter; "I should think I did. She was my own ship.
I sailed in the Pilgrim as second mate for three years, and I
started with her on that same last voyage."

It was now my turn to show surprise.

"Your ship, Peter!" I said.

"Yes," he continued. "We sailed out of Bristol in the month of
February, 1830, bound for Copenhagen, calling at Iceland. But off
the Lewis--or was it Cape Wrath?--I had some o' my bones broken,
and they put me ashore at Kirkwall."

"Yes, she called at Kirkwall," I said. "I saw that on the chart."

"That was just before I joined the Falcon, captain," continued
Peter, turning to Flett. "I mind them all, those dead folk, even to
the dog that Ericson has told us about--a retriever named Bounce.
Our skipper was a Dane named Thomassen, and his wife sailed with us
that voyage. She was as fine a woman as ever I see in Denmark.
Murray was the first mate, and the man Ericson saw through the
porthole can have been none other than Jenkins, the supercargo; he
belonged to Bristol. The only thing that puzzles me is the man that
Ericson saw lying in the captain's room."

"Maybe he went aboard in Iceland, Peter--a passenger," suggested
Flett. "Ye canna tell."

"Ay, that'll just be it," mused Peter, "a passenger, no doubt. Ay,
I well believe that will just be what he was."

Lieutenant Fox at this point moved away from the circle to get a
light for his pipe at the stove. He stood behind us listening to a
conversation between Colin Lothian and Jack Paterson; and as Peter
Brown lapsed into silent meditation I diverted my own attention to
what Colin and Jack were saying.

"Ay, Colin, but that's news," said Paterson. "And so Harry Ewan has
fallen into their hands at last, eh!"

"Ay, just that," said Lothian. "I was over at Clestron yestreen,
and they were telling me that just as Harry was slipping round into
the Bay of Houton, thinking, no doubt, that everything was clear
for the landin' o' his cargo, the revenue boat came out from behind
the Holm, like a hawk on a ferret. Ye may be sure, Jack, that Harry
and his crew didna give in without a fight for it; but the navy
lads had the upper hand at last, and, what was more to their
purpose, they found in Ewan's lugger five gallant casks o' whisky,
not to speak o' half a dozen rolls o' tobacco, and I dinna ken how
muckle salt and candles."

Lothian had raised his voice, and several of the men had moved
closer to him to hear the particulars of this raid upon one of the
known smugglers of Scapa Flow. So much, indeed, was the general
attention occupied that none of the men seemed to regard the
entrance of yet another person into the inn parlour. This was none
other than Tom Kinlay, who, with his great boots and pea jacket on
and his sou'wester hat, looked as big a man as any of them.

For a moment he hesitated, on seeing the young naval officer, but,
emboldened by Mr. Fox's disguised appearance, he took up a position
where he could hear all that was being said.

"I canna think what had put the revenue men on the track o' the
smugglers," a fisherman was saying. "Surely if any man carried the
game on secretly it was Harry Ewan."

"What's to hinder them finding out?" said Jack Paterson. "Why, I
ken'd it lang syne, though it isna ony business o' mine to ken."

"Ah!" put in Lothian, with the air of one who was well acquainted
with the subject, "it's not the most cautious that are least
suspected o' breakin' the law. Now, I ken a man that not one here
would suspect, an' he has been carryin' on the business underhand
this many a day. But tak' my word for it, the fox has his eye on
him for all that, and it isna long before he'll be dropped on the
same as Harry Ewan."

Lieutenant Fox stepped a little nearer to the speakers.

"Oho!" exclaimed Jack Paterson; "and who may that be now, Colin?"

"Weel," replied the wanderer, "it isna for me just to say, though I
wouldna lift a hand to save ony smuggling rogue. But I ken o' a
fine hole in the face o' the clifts o' Gaulton, that would suit a
smuggler grandly for stowing away a few casks o' whisky in. Sandy
Ericson was another that ken'd it. But Sandy was an honest man."

"What!" said Paterson; "d'ye mean the cave that Sandy found Carver
Kinlay in, after the wreck o' the Undine?"

"Ay," said Colin.

"Then Kinlay kens o' the cave?" continued Jack.

"Doubtless," said Colin.

David Flett raised his eyebrows at this, and I thought of his
conversation with the pilot.

"It's no' possible that Carver has ony hand in the smuggling, is
it, Colin?" he observed.

"Weel, captain, I wonldna like to assert publicly that Carver is a
smuggler himself," said Colin; "but I shouldna be surprised though
it turn out as I suspect."

"It's a lie ye tell!" furiously exclaimed Tom Kinlay, suddenly
revealing himself, and shaking his fist in Lothian's face. "It's a
lie ye tell, ye drivelling auld idiot! And if ye canna prove what
ye say, maybe ye'll deny it?"

Colin Lothian stood up and said coolly:

"Now just hold yer tongue, Kinlay. I ken mair then I hae said. And
as to denyin' it, that I willna do. Nay, threaten as ye will, I
carena. What I say is perfectly true. Carver Kinlay's a smuggler!"

Tom Kinlay bit the stem of his clay pipe so hard that it broke in
his mouth, so great was his rage. Then, as though words of denial
were of no use, he took to the more cowardly argument of violence,
and, hissing the words, "Ye auld liar, take that," raised his hand,
and struck a blow at Colin Lothian's face.

But Jack Paterson knocked up the lad's arm, and caught Tom round
the waist, dragging him forcibly away.

"What! ye young scamp, would ye strike an auld man?" he said.

And he raised Tom Kinlay in his strong arms high in air, and almost
threw him out at the open door.

"That was smartly done, my man," said Lieutenant Fox. "I wish we
had a few such fellows as you aboard the Clasper."

And thus revealing himself, the officer finished his drink and
leisurely left us.

"Who's that chap just gone out?" asked Paterson.

"It's Lieutenant Fox of the Clasper," I said.

"If that be so, then," said Colin, "it seems to me he has gone away
wiser than he came."

"Ay," said Paterson; "it's no use wonderin' how the revenue lads
get to ken about the smugglers, if that be the way they set about
it."

Shortly afterwards we went aboard the Falcon, and the rest of the
day was spent in cleaning up after the voyage, and in balancing our
accounts. In this latter occupation I think my assistance was not
without value to Davie Flett, whose system of bookkeeping was
original and peculiar, involving a large use of hieroglyphics,
which were not always clear even to the skipper himself.

That evening when I tramped over the moor to Lyndardy the snow fell
heavily--a driving, drifting snow that penetrated into every cranny
it had access to, and collected in deep wreaths on meadow and moor.
The cold wind blew hard from the north, carrying the fine snow past
me in great clouds that curled and swept along the hard ground,
forming in some places high barriers that were almost impassable,
in other places leaving the ground perfectly bare.



Chapter XXXV. A Search And A Discovery.


All through that night the snow fell unceasingly, and the drifts
grew deeper and deeper in the hollows.

At bedtime, after our chapter from the Bible had been read, my
mother barred the door, and said:

"Let us be thankful, bairns, that we are all at home this night. I
couldna sleep in my bed if I thought there was kith or kin o' mine
outside on such a night o' blind drift. It's just terrible."

And I think we all slept the more comfortably, feeling that we knew
of no one who was suffering in the storm.

Some hours before daylight, while I lay dreaming in my cosy box
bed, I was awakened by hearing a rapping noise. I listened,
fancying it was but the noise of some rat behind the wainscot that
had come for shelter into the warm house; but the loud knocking
came again. I hurriedly drew on some clothes and opened the outer
door. A wild gust of wind and snow swished in upon me, and in the
deep snow outside there stood a woman holding a lighted lantern.

"Please d'ye ken anything about Thora Kinlay?" said she; and I
recognized Ann, the servant woman of Crua Breck.

"Anything about Thora?" I asked, surprised at the inquiry. "Why,
Ann, what's gone wrong wi' her?"

"We're feared she's lost," said the woman. "She went outby in the
forenoon, and she hasna come back yet."

"Did she not say where she was going to?" I asked.

"No; and we've heard nothing o' her. We canna think what can hae
come ower her."

"But where are Carver and Tom, and the boat's crew?" I asked. "Have
they not been out seeking for the lass?"

"No; they're all away in the St. Magnus; and the mistress is ill in
her bed. The shepherd and me has been seekin' Thora all the night,
and I've come to Lyndardy, thinkin' ye might hae seen her
yestreen."

"No; I havena seen Thora these nine or ten weeks past," I said.
"But if she be out in this storm she must be looked for; so bide
here a wee, Ann, and I'll come out and help ye."

I thereupon hastened within for my sea boots and oilskins. I had
next to procure a lantern from the byre; and this was somewhat
difficult, for the snow had drifted in a high bank against the
door, and I had to remove it before I could effect an entrance.
Lighting the lantern, and taking down my long staff, I noticed that
my climbing lines had been taken from the peg where they usually
hung. My gun, too, was amissing. No one but myself had any use for
either the ropes or the gun, and I thought it curious that they
were removed; but at the moment I did not concern myself about so
apparently trivial a circumstance.

I soon rejoined the woman, and with her I made diligent search for
Thora. Backward and forward we tramped for many weary miles in the
wind and snow. We went by every road and footpath that we knew, yet
not even a footmark but our own could we find.

I questioned Ann and the shepherd, who had joined us, as to where
they had searched before I came out. The shepherd had been to a
cottage where lived an old woman named Mary Firth, but Mary was not
at home, and there was no one in the cottage--no trace of Thora.

"Has either o' ye been across at Jack Paterson's croft?" I then
asked.

"No," said the shepherd.

"Weel, then, that's the only place she can have been to, that I can
think of. So you two had better get back to Crua Breck and wait
till daylight. I'll gang to Jack Paterson's, and if they ken
nothing of Thora there, we can only wait till the morning."

The two returned to the farm, therefore, and I tramped through the
storm to the croft of Clouston, past the ghostly standing stones of
the Druids, and along the dreary, snow-covered road.

The cottage was in darkness, with a great drift of snow against the
door. I knocked with my stick several times, and presently I heard
Jack Paterson's gruff voice demanding who was there.

"It's me, Halcro Ericson. Open the door, Jack."

"Save us all!" he exclaimed, raising the bolt. "What brings ye out
on a night like this, lad? Come inside."

"No; I'm seeking for Thora Kinlay; d'ye ken anything about her;
she's lost!"

"Lost! No; I ken nothing o' her. But wait and I'll see the bairns."

He returned to the door in a few minutes.

"Hilda says that Thora was here yestreen," he said. "But she went
away to Crua Breck when the snow came on so bad."

I was dismayed at his answer, for it seemed to prove to me that
Thora was really lost in the snow.

Paterson offered to continue the search with me, but I advised him
to dress and go to Stromness, and make inquiries in the town, while
I left him and returned to Lyndardy, always searching for
footprints on the snow.

At dawn I resumed the search with my sister Jessie. We first went
to Crua Breck to make sure that Thora had not yet returned. We
heard that Mrs. Kinlay was very ill now, and that Ann could not
leave her.

We returned by the top of the cliffs, where the snow was shallow,
but nothing rewarded our search until we got as far as North
Gaulton, where we observed what appeared to be footprints crossing
our path. They were indistinct, for the wind had disturbed the
snow; but they were indeed footprints, and we followed them. They
led us to the brink of the cliff, to the very spot where Thora and
I had, many weeks before, gone over to descend to the cave.

"Somebody has gone over here, Hal," said Jessie. "Look down on that
jag of rock, there is the mark of a rope!"

And at once I remembered about the disappearance of my climbing
lines. I looked to where Jessie pointed, and sure enough there were
the marks of a rope, where it had disturbed the snow and grazed
against the frosted stone. There was no rope hanging there, but I
well knew that it could have been removed from below by means of a
few dexterous jerks and twitches.

I reasoned with myself upon what I saw, and I considered that the
person who had gone down the cliff could be none other than Thora,
for I believed that none but she knew of that way down to the cave.
Only she and Tom Kinlay knew that I kept my climbing ropes in the
byre; but Tom had, as Ann told me, gone out in the St. Magnus. Only
Thora could have taken them, then.

What her possible reason for going down to the cave might be, I did
not pause to reflect, further than surmising the probability of her
having had some quarrel with her father, and of her having run away
from Crua Breck as she had once threatened to do. But why do this
on such a night of storm?

The first thing to be done was to ascertain beyond doubt if Thora
was now in the cave. Had it been expedient, I would at once have
gone over the cliff, notwithstanding its frozen condition.
Unfortunately, however, I had no other good rope than the one that
had been taken away. An old one I had which was neither long enough
nor strong enough for the purpose; but even this might be of
service, I thought. We went back to the farm, and Jessie helped me
to lengthen the rope by joining to it several shorter pieces. Then,
judging that Thora, if she were in the cavern, would be suffering
from want of food, we got a small basket and stored it with
tempting eatables--some newly-made scones, two hard-boiled eggs,
and a closed flagon filled with hot tea. Thus prepared we went
together through the snow to the cliff.

Whilst I was tying the rope to the handle of our basket, Jessie
gathered some stones and threw them down the precipice to attract
Thora's attention to the mouth of the cave. I stood out on the
brink of the cliff above the cavern and allowed the line to slip
through my fingers as though I were "heaving the lead," until the
basket touched upon the rock at the entrance to the cave.

For several minutes we waited for some sign that the food was
accepted. Twice the line was drawn up a little, and the weight of
the basket was still felt. I called for more stones to throw down,
at the same time kicking a loose piece of rock well out, so that it
fell with a loud splash into the deep water. Jessie went about
picking up stones from among the snow, when suddenly an exclamation
escaped her.

"Eh, Hal!" said she; "why here's your magic stone!"

"Impossible!" I exclaimed, unable to believe her.

"I tell you it is, indeed!" she protested; and she brought the
stone to me, holding it in the palm of her hand.

I at once recognized the viking's talisman. And now I felt sure
that Thora was in the cave, and that she had probably dropped the
stone by some accident before going over the brink of the cliff,
for it was at the very edge that Jessie found it.

When I tried the rope again, I felt that the basket was being held.
Then the line was drawn further down, and again set loose, and I
drew it up. The basket had been emptied.

In the afternoon, as the snow had abated, I went out, though
without stating my intention, and returned to the top of the cliff,
determined upon making the descent to the cave and hearing from
Thora her reason for this strange freak of hers, before venturing
to inform them at Crua Breck that I had discovered the girl's
hiding place. The danger of a descent was very great, for the face
of the rocks was in parts coated with frozen snow, and I knew that
besides the difficulty of climbing with cold hands there was the
possibility of slipping upon the icy surface of the ledges. But now
I had my viking stone to protect me, and with less hesitation than
the occasion warranted I proceeded to climb down the precipice, and
was fortunate enough to reach the bottom without accident.

Lighting a small lantern I had brought, I walked into the cavern,
thinking it strange that I saw no trace of Thora at the entrance,
for I had made noise enough to attract her. Yet I noticed the
flagon that had held the warm tea we had sent down in the morning
lying empty on a flat stone. I continued my way further into the
cavern, watching the play of light upon the huge stalactites that
hung from the roof. At last I came to the stream in which Thora had
so nearly lost her life. It was swollen, and rushed past with great
force. At one point a kind of bridge had been formed by a couple of
wooden planks that had been thrown across. Over this bridge I
crossed, turning my lantern to right and left, anxiously looking
for Thora, whom I also called by name. Beyond the little bridge I
was sensible of a strong spirituous smell, and this became still
stronger as I advanced, until, when I held my light towards a side
chamber of the cave I discerned a large number of small kegs.

At once I thought of what Colin Lothian had said the day before in
Gray's Inn about smuggled whisky. Here, then, I had discovered the
secret store of some unlawful trader. But my surprise at this soon
abated in my anxiety to find Thora. I was continuing my way yet
further when my foot touched something strange. I turned my light
upon it, and there, lying before me, was the sleeping form, not of
Thora, but of Tom Kinlay.



Chapter XXXVI. Trapped In The Cave.


I stood for some moments transfixed with surprise at seeing Tom
Kinlay in this situation. He was lying with his head and shoulders
upon a square box and snoring loudly. Behind him were piled up many
kegs, which I doubted not were filled with contraband spirits. As I
reasoned on all this I surmised that Tom was there probably by the
directions of his father, whom, after what I had heard and seen, I
could not but associate with the smugglers.

I now, for the first time, saw also some shade of reason for the
enmity that had existed between Carver and my father. At the time
of the wreck of the Undine, years before, when he was stranded in
the cavern, Carver had no doubt seen the convenience of the place
for smuggling purposes. The cave was commodious, and the fact that
its situation was little known among the natives gave it the
additional advantage of secrecy.

I could not tell whether Kinlay had carried on his illicit traffic
whilst my father was alive, but I guessed that this was so; and
believing that my father was the only man who knew his secret, I
saw reason sufficient for enmity. My father's death had removed the
one great obstacle in the way of Carver's carrying on the smuggling
unsuspected. It had also enabled him to become a pilot--a position
which gave unusual opportunity to a man so unscrupulous. As pilot
he was able to board any vessel that entered the Orcadian waters,
and in the case of ships which came over from the Continent or from
the north of Scotland with contraband goods, a transfer of cargo
could be boldly effected without exciting suspicion. And here in
the cave I saw before me a part of the smuggler's store.

Having explored the cavern by the light of my lantern, I was forced
to believe that Thora was not there. I returned once more to the
kegs of spirits before departing.

Tom was still sound asleep. Approaching him, I turned the light
upon him and knelt down, shielding the light from his closed eyes.

Suddenly I was alarmed by hearing the noise of voices at the outer
part of the cave--the voices of many men. I blew out the light of
my lantern, rose to my feet, and slipped into the shadow to watch,
for I did not doubt that these were the smugglers.

I had not stood there very long before I observed a flickering of
lights, and the sound of men's feet and voices came nearer and
nearer. Then I saw the lights of two lanterns, and distinguished
the figures of five men. Their sea jackets were powdered with snow.

"Now, lads," said a hoarse voice that I recognized as Carver
Kinlay's, "look smart. Get as many as ye can into the boat, then
roll the others into the water."

His eyes rested upon the sleeping form of his son.

"Hullo!" he cried, "why, here is the young devil after all!"

Then, crossing the plank bridge, he gave Tom a heavy kick in the
ribs, and placed his lantern on the top of one of the casks.

Tom awoke with a start, and I saw him tremble as in fear. His face
was ghastly white.

"Where have ye been all night?" growled his father, without waiting
for an answer; "hurry along here and help to get these kegs into
the boat."

Young Kinlay rose and staggered after the men. Evidently he had
broached one of the whisky kegs.

I drew closer within the shadow of the rock and watched the
proceedings. The smugglers carried away one by one as many of the
spirit kegs as I believed might lie in the bottom of the St.
Magnus. This was done in a great hurry as though much depended upon
getting the things cleared away, and Carver was for ever urging his
men to "hurry up!"

Then they all set to work, and rolled what remained of the casks
into the stream, until, after about an hour's time, there was left
no trace of the smuggler's store, excepting only the square box
that Tom had slept upon.

Carver Kinlay knelt down beside this chest and unlocked it. He
turned over many bundles of papers, and I saw him take out what
appeared to be a roll of bank notes and thrust them into his breast
pocket. He paused suddenly in his work at the hurried return of his
men, and grasped at the box like a miser suddenly surprised.

"The hounds are on us!" exclaimed one excitedly. "They have taken
the boat!" And almost immediately there was a tramp of feet coming
up the cavern, and a blaze of light from several torches shining on
drawn cutlasses.

Kinlay turned with the fury of a wild animal that finds itself
trapped, and stood at bay before a company of blue jackets, who
were headed by the young officer I had twice before met, Lieutenant
Fox of the revenue cutter Clasper.

"In the Queen's name, I arrest you, Carver Kinlay!" said the
officer in a firm, loud voice.

"Not so easily," said Kinlay, who was evidently determined not to
surrender himself without resistance; and planting one foot firmly
on the little bridge which spanned the stream, he drew a large
revolver and pointed it full at the lieutenant's head.

Standing very near to him, in a dark crevice at his right hand, I
saw the movement. I saw Carver's eyes flash in the torchlight, and
just as the click of the trigger sounded I sprang quickly forward
and knocked the man's hand upward. The shot rattled among the
stalactites of the roof, and the report filled the cavern with
deafening noise.

Kinlay was utterly taken aback by what happened, and as the weapon
fell from his hand and dropped into the deep water, he turned
instinctively to see who had attacked him. Two of the cutter's men
thereupon crossed the planks and encountered him on the large flat
rock whence the casks had been taken, while I made my way past
them.

I was walking coolly over the little bridge, with my extinguished
lantern in my hand, when the lieutenant stepped forward and took me
by the collar.

"Aha, youngster!" he exclaimed, "I've seen you before. You've done
me a good turn, but I must take you nevertheless."

And he retained his hold of my jacket, giving directions to his men
the while.

I made a gentle protest, showing no resistance, and stood by the
officer, looking excitedly at the scuffle that ensued between the
smugglers and the revenue men. Tom Kinlay had already been seized
and dragged off to the cutter's boat. One of the smugglers had
retreated to the inner recesses of the cave, taking refuge in the
darkness, and the three others were having a severe fight with the
sailors, using large knives in their defence.

Two of them were speedily overpowered, one of them receiving a
serious wound in his side, the other a great cut across his cheek.
They were both taken to the boat, and there kept under strict
guard. The third man managed to get over to Kinlay.

Carver, on losing his pistol, had taken out his sheath knife, and
armed with this he fought with furious determination, standing with
his back against a wall of rock. One of his antagonists, in trying
to lay hold of his hand, was badly cut, and the other disabled by a
blow in the face. But when Carver was joined by his comrade there
was a rush of the cutter's men across the bridge, and the smugglers
were finally conquered.

They had yet to be brought over to the outer side of the stream,
however, and this was a work of no small difficulty. A couple of
the sailors walked over the narrow planks, one before and one
behind their prisoner, who made an unsuccessful attempt to break
loose.

Then Carver was brought to the bridge in a similar manner; and he
also attempted to escape by making a spring forward when he reached
the middle of the planks. His captors, however, were ready for him.
The man behind him had held his two hands, and when by main force
he got his right hand free, the sailor held with such a tight grip
to the other that Carver was pulled round and he overbalanced
himself.

A stiff struggle for mastery then took place. Kinlay was the
stronger man, and with his free hand he dealt the sailor a hard
blow on the chest. The sailor staggered and fell across the narrow
planks, but still holding Kinlay's left hand he pulled the pilot
smuggler down with him. The sailor let his hand go free. Then
Kinlay tripped, and, uttering a wild yell, fell headlong into the
rushing stream.

The lieutenant, seeing what had happened, loosened his grasp of my
collar and hurried over to his men to try to save Carver from the
dreadful current. One of the wooden planks was thrown into the
water for him to take hold of, but Carver must have failed in his
attempt to reach it. One of the cutter's men ran to the mouth of
the cave and brought back with him a long rope--my own climbing
rope--which he had seen lying on the rocks: this also was too late,
for Carver was already carried off by the swift stream, no doubt to
be taken over into that gulf where Thora had so nearly lost her
life.

There now remained only one other of the smugglers to be captured,
and he was ultimately discovered crouching like a terrified dog in
a dark corner. Before the revenue men left, however, they made a
careful search of the cavern; but they brought nothing down to the
boat excepting the wooden box that Kinlay had been searching in
when he was surprised by the arrival of the blue jackets.

When this excitement was over, and the lieutenant had ordered his
men to return to their boat, I was wondering what their movements
would be in regard to myself. Would they leave me to climb the
cliff and go home, or would they take me round to Stromness?

I was not left long in doubt. Two of the sailors, still with drawn
cutlasses, took me into the bow of the longboat and placed me there
beside Tom Kinlay and the other prisoners, and bound me to them
with my own rope. Then the lieutenant took his seat in the stern
sheets, his men plied their oars, and we were taken out to the
cutter, which lay anchored a few fathoms out from the rocks.

We were all taken aboard of her. Her white canvas was hoisted and
her anchor weighed, and soon we were speeding blithely along in the
direction of Stromness, with the St. Magnus towed astern.



Chapter XXXVII. In Which I Am Put Under Arrest.


When we were well under weigh, and I had done admiring the cutter's
trim fittings and the smartness of her men, I turned to consider
the condition of my unfortunate companions. Two of them were badly
wounded, and they were ordered to be taken below to have their
wounds dressed, whilst the others were now being placed in irons.
They were bound hand and foot to a gun carriage.

Tom Kinlay, who was beside me under the starboard bulwarks, watched
the men with consternation in his face. He was evidently very much
afraid. I saw him put his hand to his breast as though he felt
there for something. I thought he was searching for some weapon;
but whatever it was he did not find it. He opened his coat and
still searched.

"Hang it!" he exclaimed, "I must have lost it;" and then he looked
at me accusingly.

Somehow I thought just then of my viking's stone that I had
recovered so strangely, and as I took it from my pocket and assured
myself that it was all safe, I began to wonder how it had come to
be left there at the top of the cliff. How had Thora allowed it to
go out of her keeping? And Thora, where now was she?

Suddenly I felt a warm breath on my face. I turned and saw Tom
Kinlay glaring at me.

"Ah! it is you," he exclaimed; "you've stolen it from me!"

And he made a grab at the stone, which fell from my hand upon the
deck, for the string had been taken from it, and I had consequently
not been able to hang it round my neck. We both scrambled upon the
deck, each eager to secure the talisman. But I managed to push
Kinlay away, and picking up the stone I put it safely in my breast
pocket just as two of the cutter's men came towards us.

"Now, then, youngster," said one of them, taking Tom by the
shoulder, "it's your turn now, my lad;" and he proceeded to adjust
a pair of handcuffs upon Tom's wrists.

At the same time the other sailor came to me and was in the act of
binding me in a similar manner when Lieutenant Fox came forward
from the after deck.

"Hold hard, Gillions!" he said. "This youngster needn't be treated
like the others, I think. Leave him to me;" and addressing me he
asked, "What is your name, my lad?"

"Halcro Ericson, sir," I replied.

"Well, Ericson, tell me, how came you to be mixed up in this
affair? I thought I saw you on board that coasting schooner, the
Falcon, the other night. Have you turned smuggler since then?"

"No, sir; I was in the cave for something else. I was down seeking
for Thora."

"For Thora? What's that--some sort of birds?"

"Birds! No; for the lass that was lost in the snow yestreen."

"Queer place to look for a lass, that, I must say! But how did you
get there if you did not go round with Kinlay?"

"I climbed down the cliff, sir."

"Come, come, none of your nonsense!" said the officer. "Don't tell
me you climbed down that cliff. I know it's impossible."

"It's not impossible," I rejoined, "for I have climbed it many a
time before."

"Well, it's to be hoped the girl was worth risking your neck for.
However, as you did not find her after all, you deserve to get off,
to look for her in a more likely place."

Then turning to the seaman he said:

"Off with the irons, Gillions, and put the youngster ashore when
the anchor's down."

"Ay, ay, sir!" said Gillions.

Accordingly I was set free; and seeing my rope lying on the deck I
coiled it up ready to take ashore with me, taking it aft to the
gangway.

We were by this time abreast of the Ness and entering Stromness
Bay. Notwithstanding the continued falling of snow, several boats
put out from the jetties of the harbour when the Clasper was seen
sailing in with her prize; and as the chains, rattled over her bow
and she came to an anchorage close inshore, she was surrounded by
inquiring fisher folk.

In one of the first boats that came alongside sat Bailie Duke
wrapped in a great gray plaid. He hailed one of the petty officers
of the cutter, and Mr. Fox came forward and asked him aboard.

"What's all this about?" said Mr. Duke, addressing the lieutenant
as he stepped on the deck. "I see ye've made a prisoner of our
pilot."

"I've made prisoner of a smuggler, sir, pilot or not pilot," said
Mr. Fox.

"But on whose authority have you taken the St. Magnus? Do you not
know that she is our pilot boat?" asked the bailie.

"On the highest authority, Mr. Duke--the Queen's," replied the
lieutenant. "If Kinlay was your pilot, then all the greater was his
offence. His men must suffer the penalty for their crime, and I
suppose the port must just appoint another pilot, that's all."

"His men must suffer, you say?" said Mr. Duke, not understanding.
"Then you do not accuse Carver Kinlay himself of smuggling?"

"I should certainly have done that, Mr. Duke; but Carver Kinlay,
unfortunately, is dead."

"Carver Kinlay dead!" exclaimed the bailie.

"Yes; he lost his life just now in the Gaulton Cave, where we
discovered him and his crew in the act of carrying off contraband
spirits.

"I suppose," the officer continued, "we can send the prisoners
ashore to your jail, sir?"

"Certainly," said Mr. Duke; "we've plenty of room there: send them
ashore. But they will be tried at Kirkwall, not here, you know."

"I know," returned the officer; "but you see the roads are blocked
with this snow. There's no getting to Kirkwall except by sea, and I
have another little affair of this sort on hand tonight."

Bailie Duke was naturally inquisitive, and at the mention of this
other "little affair" he pricked up his ears.

The lieutenant drew him to the other side of the deck, and they
both remained there in earnest conversation. Mr. Duke had his back
towards me. He had not observed me as yet. But the cutter's boat
was being got out to take me ashore, and as I was anxious to hear
from him whether Thora had been found, I walked across and waited
until he should turn round. As I stood there I heard my own name
mentioned.

"Oh, it's just as clear as daylight!" said the magistrate, in reply
to a question from Mr. Fox. "I have traced it all out. There is
little doubt that it was young Halcro Ericson that did it."

"Halcro Ericson! What! the boy Halcro Ericson?" exclaimed the
lieutenant with undisguised surprise. "Why, then, that accounts for
our finding him hiding in the cave! I would never have thought it."

"What!" said the bailie. "You don't mean you have got the lad?"

"Yes, I do, sir; that is if you have no other natives with the same
outlandish name. He's on board, I assure you. Ay, and here he is."

The officer turned round towards me where I stood with my lantern
in one hand, and the coil of rope over my shoulder.

Bailie Duke looked at me with a frown on his brow, and his eyes
were steadily fixed upon my face, which could only have reflected
the innocence of my heart.

"I cannot believe it," he said in an undertone; "and yet the
thing's so clear."

Then he laid a hand sternly on my shoulder, and said, "Ericson, my
lad, I'm really sorry; but, you see, there's no use evadin' the
hand o' the law, and I must make you my prisoner."

"Your prisoner, Mr. Duke! But you cannot think that I have anything
to do with the smuggling?"

"Smuggling!" said he. "I said nothing about smuggling. With that I
have no business. No, it's not the smuggling, it's the murder!"

"Murder! What murder?" I gasped.

"The murder of Colin Lothian, the wandering beggar," he said.

Colin Lothian murdered! I was stunned and perplexed by these
terrible words. But, without further explanation, Mr. Duke gave
orders to some men in the boat he had come out by to make a
prisoner of me. Two men came aboard and bound my arms about me with
my own rope, and conducted me into the boat, while the bailie got
down into the stern, where he sat ruminating as we were rowed
towards the landing pier.

I was marched between two guards up the narrow street of Stromness,
and the cold snow fell down upon me. At the doors of the houses
women and children, whose faces were all so familiar, looked at me,
some with pity, some with shrinking fear. I heard strange
utterances of accusation.

"Who would have thought it, that he could hae done such a thing?"
said one.

"See how the lad hangs his head!" said another.

"Ay, but it's a young murderer he is," said a third.

And this word "murderer" sounded in my ears from every side, and
much I wondered what it all could mean.

When we arrived at the door of the prison house a crowd of the
townspeople awaited us. I looked round the faces fearlessly, and in
their midst I recognized the wrinkled face of my skipper, Davie
Flett.

"Cheer up, my hearty!" said he, as I passed by him. "We'll not
heave anchor till ye come out; and you'll not be long, I'll
warrant."

But I confess it was difficult for me to feel cheerful at that
moment. Indeed, when the prison doors closed upon me, when I found
myself alone in my dark cell, I became dazed and stupid, and began
to think that perhaps after all I was the murderer that I had been
called. Yet what could it all mean? Colin Lothian murdered! My old
friend Colin Lothian!



Chapter XXXVIII. Accused Of Murder.


I need not prolong my narrative by telling you in what way I spent
that first night in the cold solitude of my prison cell, or by
recording the thoughts that occupied my mind through those long and
weary hours. My jailer, one Jimmy Macfarlane, an honest,
kind-hearted man, who had known my father, gave me a basin of hot
porridge before he locked me up for the night, and left with me, as
though by accident, a good, thick horse cloth to keep me warm.
Conscious of my innocence, and trusting in the justice of my
accusers, I slept well and soundly, nor did I awake until late on
the following morning, when the Sabbath light stole through the
crossbars of the little window, and the opening of the door aroused
me.

I heard Macfarlane speaking with some one.

"Ye'll find him in here, captain; but dinna stay ower long wi' him;
for, ye ken, I'm breakin' the rule in letting ye see the lad."

"All right, Jimmy!" said a voice that I at once recognized as that
of Captain Flett.

"Well, Ericson, my lad," he said, entering the cell and offering me
his hand. "They've not put the hangman's rope round your neck yet,
I see."

Then he added in a more serious tone, "Come, I canna stay with you
long. Let us talk the affair over, and see what's to be done."

"First of all then," I said, "I want to know what it's all about.
Why have they put me in here?"

"What! have they not told you the particulars?"

"No; I know nothing but that old Colin Lothian has been murdered."

"And ye dinna ken who it was that murdered him? Tell me the truth
now."

"I know nothing at all about it," I said.

"Well, then, I'll just tell you all that I know myself, Ericson."

And sitting down beside me on an old box that was in the cell, the
skipper proceeded with his account of the affair, of which the
following is the substance.

On the afternoon following that of the beginning of the snowstorm,
Captain Flett waited for me on the schooner, for he wanted to set
sail again. Every now and then he went up the companion ladder to
look out for me towards the snow-covered town. While thus engaged
he heard the boatswain's whistle sounded on board the revenue
cutter, then lying in the outer bay, and he was admiring the
alertness of the blue jackets as they got the cutter ready for
sailing, when a small boat that he had not noticed came alongside
of the Falcon, and Bailie Duke accosted him.

"Captain Flett," said the bailie excitedly, "I want the lad
Ericson; where is he?"

"'Deed I can't tell you that, your honour," replied Flett. "I have
been waiting for him here mysel' all the day."

"Just as I expected," said the bailie, with evident annoyance; "the
young rascal has escaped. When did you last see him, captain?"

"I saw him yestreen, sir. But was it anything of importance you're
wanting the lad for?"

"Anything of importance! Ay, is it of importance! For, know you
this, Captain Flett, the lad's nothing but a murderer, a murderer
in cold blood!"

"Impossible!" ejaculated the skipper. "When heard you of the lad
harming body or beast? But who is it that's murdered, bailie?"

"Colin Lothian, the gaberlunzie," replied the magistrate.

"Man, you astonish me," exclaimed Flett. "Poor auld Lothian! And
when did the thing happen?"

Bailie Duke then told how during that morning a party of men had
been sent up from the town to the moor to search for the lost Thora
Kinlay. They did not find the girl. But Jack Paterson and another
fisherman, while crossing a very lonely part of the moor, had
discovered a poor dog, whose pitiful whining had drawn them to the
spot. The animal was at once recognized as the dog that had always
been seen at the heels of the wandering beggar, and it stood
shivering in the cold snow that had gathered there in a deep
wreath. The dog refused to move from the spot, and the men cleared
away some of the snow, when they came upon the stiff and lifeless
body of Colin Lothian.

At first they thought the man was merely asleep, for his woollen
plaid was spread over him like a blanket. But on raising the
garment they saw marks of blood that had trickled upon the snow and
sunk down into the underlying heather. Paterson at once despatched
his companion to Stromness for Dr. Linklater, whilst he himself
went up to a small cottage which stood about two hundred yards
away. Nobody was in the cottage, but there were signs of some one
having been there very recently, for the peats were yet smouldering
on the hearthstone, and on a little table lay a towel stained with
blood.

Dr. Linklater arrived sooner than Paterson expected him, and after
a careful examination of the body he stated that Lothian had been
dead several hours, and that his death was the result of foul play.
The man had, in fact, been murdered.

"I'm real sorry to hear this, sir," said Flett to the bailie. "It
was only yestreen I was speakin' wi' poor Colin at the inn. He'll
be sorely missed in the countryside. But tell me, Mr. Duke, what
for d'ye say that young Ericson has anything to do wi' it?"

"Because," the magistrate replied, "simply because the gun that the
man was shot with was found near the spot where he died. That gun,
captain, is identified as Halcro Ericson's."

"But surely ye canna convict the lad on such slight evidence, sir.
He's innocent, I'll swear!"

"I trust he may prove so, captain. But you must allow that the
evidence is against him. Colin has been shot dead, and with
Ericson's gun. Ericson is not to be found; no one knows where he
is. That is clearly against him; and as a magistrate I am bound to
arrest him on suspicion. In fact, I have already issued a warrant
for his arrest, and if you know anything of his whereabouts, just
say so, Davie; for the lad's not at his home, and his mother knows
nothing. They say he is out seeking for young Thora Kinlay; but it
seems clear to me that he has fled from the consequences of his
foul crime."

"Well," said Flett, "I have told you all I know, that the lad left
the schooner here before the snow came on so heavy. I have been
expecting him aboard all the day. I know no more, Mr. Duke, and
that's the truth."

At this point of my skipper's account we were interrupted by
Macfarlane, who put his head in at the door and said:

"Come away, Davie. I canna let ye stay longer, man."

"Ay, ay, just another minute, Jimmy," said Flett.

Then turning to me again, he continued: "Weel, I'm just away up to
Dominie Drever's. The dominie was aboard the Falcon just before the
Clasper came in yestreen, and I saw him again after ye were brought
here. He was up at Lyndardy this mornin' seeing your mother for
information about all your movements these two days past. And now
I'm to go up to the schoolhouse and tell him--what shall I tell
him, Halcro?"

"Just tell him this, Davie: that the last time I saw poor Colin
Lothian was when we were in Gray's Inn. That I went straight home
from the Falcon, and never left the house till the servant woman at
Crua Breck knocked me up to seek for Thora. That I was out looking
for her part of the night and all the morning, and then that I
climbed down the Gaulton Cliff, thinking I would find her in the
cave. There, instead of finding Thora, I was taken along with the
smugglers and brought in the Clasper to Stromness, where Bailie
Duke himself arrested me.

"There, that is the sum of it all. Tell it to Mr. Drever, and he
will believe it and understand."

"Very good," said the skipper, and then he left me.

He had not gone out many minutes before Jimmy Macfarlane came into
the apartment and made a fire in the grate, and brought me water to
wash myself, and a good breakfast of coffee and fried bacon. When I
was made comfortable he left me alone again, and only disturbed me
during the rest of the day to bring in my meals or more fuel for
the fire.



Chapter XXXIX. An Unprofessional Inquiry.


Whatever the common opinion among the people of Stromness may have
been with regard to the death of Colin Lothian, there was one who,
all along, never allowed himself to doubt my innocence. Dominie
Drever had his private views on the matter, and he was not over
eager to communicate them to other persons. He even kept them from
myself in a great measure, and only gathered such information
regarding my movements as Captain Flett and my people at Lyndardy
were able to supply. There were some other aspects of the case,
quite apart from myself, that he was anxious to make clear, and
with this purpose in view he had gone quietly about the town
gathering evidence and summoning an array of important witnesses.

Not until late on this Sunday afternoon did he come to see me; and
then our interview lasted but for a few moments. Macfarlane showed
him in just as I was finishing my tea and settling myself cosily
before the fire.

"Ah, Halcro, my lad!" he exclaimed in his breezy way, "I see they
are making you comfortable here. I hope you find it no great
hardship to be cooped up here, eh? It's hardly so bad as your
experience on the Falcon, I should think?"

"No, sir, and I hope it will not last so long either," I said,
taking the hand he offered me.

"Little fear o' that," said he. "Mr. Duke will send you home i' the
morning; but it's as well you should stay here until the evidence
is complete. Bailie Thomson will not agree to your being set at
liberty before the inquiry."

"And when is the inquiry to be?" I asked.

"At ten o'clock tomorrow morning," said Mr. Drever. "You see,
Halcro, they're not to put you on your trial in any formal way.
That could only take place at Kirkwall, or before the procurator
fiscal. But the roads are all blocked wi' snow, and there's no
getting to Kirkwall just now. Even the St. Magnus smugglers, and
another gang that Mr. Fox arrested yestreen up at Sandwick, have to
be imprisoned here until the roads are opened up. But it will be
easy to prove your innocence. Thora will make that perfectly clear,
as ye will see."

"Thora!" I exclaimed. "Then Thora has been found?"

"Found! certainly. She never was lost. However, ye'll hear all
about that matter again. Just leave it all to me, Halcro, and dinna
be downcast about biding here another night. But I must away now.
Good e'en to ye!"

"Good e'en, sir!"

The good man was leaving me abruptly, when at the door he turned
back.

"Oh, Halcro!" said he, as though suddenly remembering something,
"they tell me that your viking's stone has been amissing. Have ye
heard anything of it yet?"

"Why, yes, Mr. Drever," I replied. "I found it at the head of the
Gaulton Cliff on Saturday."

"Just so," said he smiling, "I had heard that. Now that stone may
be wanted in evidence. Would you mind letting me have it?"

"Here it is, sir," I said, handing it to him.

And taking it with him, he left me to my thoughts.

The morning of the inquiry came round, and at about ten o'clock
Jimmy Macfarlane opened the door of my place of confinement and
beckoned me to follow him. He conducted me through a long passage
into a large room adjoining the prison house.

It was a comfortable apartment, with a bright peat fire burning on
the hearth, before which Colin Lothian's dog lay sound asleep.
Close to the fire and athwart the room was a long table, where, as
I entered, I saw Bailie Duke seated at his ease in a large
armchair. At his right sat Bailie Thomson--a man with a forbidding
face, whom I had often of late seen in the company of Carver
Kinlay. At Mr. Duke's left hand was the schoolmaster, prim and
businesslike as I had often seen him look in the school when
anything of importance was pending, such as a class examination.
Near him sat Lieutenant Fox, looking very handsome in his naval
uniform, and very much at his ease. The only other person in the
room was Dr. Linklater, who smiled a greeting to me as I stood at
the door.

"Take a seat there, Ericson, my lad," said Mr. Duke, indicating a
chair opposite to him in the middle of the floor.

And then he turned to the dominie, speaking with him in an
undertone.

These five men, who were all in different degrees known to me,
presented no very formal aspect, and I felt no dread of what was to
follow. As I sat there awaiting the opening of the proceedings I
looked straight before me at the long table. Here, lying in front
of the two bailies, were my fowling piece and a coil of rope.
Before Mr. Drever lay Jarl Haffling's talisman; also, to my
surprise, I observed the wooden box that I had seen in the cave,
and the little chest that I had taken from the chart room of the
Pilgrim; on the lid of the latter was the log book of that
ill-fated ship.

What these relics of the Pilgrim could possibly have to do with the
murder of Colin Lothian I was at a loss to know. But their
importance in the issue of the case will presently be seen.

"Halcro Ericson!" said Bailie Duke.

I rose to my feet and faced him. He tapped his snuffbox and took a
large pinch, and leisurely passed the box to the dominie.
Presently, after much use of his bandanna handkerchief, he
continued:

"Halcro Ericson, you were arrested on Saturday last on suspicion of
being the murderer of Colin Lothian--a poor, worthy man, known and
respected in the Mainland for many, many years. At the time of your
arrest on board the Clasper, the evidence against you was
circumstantially complete, and appeared to be conclusive. Further
evidence of an important nature, however, has since been gathered
by Mr. Drever here, and it has brought new light upon the matter.
You are not, I am happy to say, to be formally charged with the
murder of Lothian; but, in the absence of the proper official--the
procurator fiscal--it is necessary that I, as the senior bailie of
Stromness, should make some inquiry into this case, you see. You
will presently be examined with other witnesses, and you will have
an opportunity of, I hope, clearing yourself of whatever suspicion
is still attached to you. Sit down again, Halcro."

Concluding this speech, Mr. Duke rang a little hand bell that was
on the table, and Macfarlane appeared at one of the doors.

"Just send in Jack Paterson and Steenie Barrie," he said; and
presently the two fishermen were ushered in. Paterson, entering
first, touched his forelock to the magistrate, and similarly
saluted Lieutenant Fox.

"Jack, my man," said Mr. Duke, "just let us know what way ye found
auld Colin's body."

Paterson stepped up to the table, twirling his sou'wester round and
round by the brim between his two big hands.

"Weel, ye see, Mr. Duke," began Jack falteringly, "I was lying in
my bed on Friday night when young Halcro Ericson knocked at the
door and telt me that Thora Kinlay was out in the storm and couldna
be found. So I cam' along to Stromness--"

"Ay, but dinna mind that part o' the story, Jack," interrupted Mr.
Duke; "just begin where Steenie and you heard the dog."

"Yes, Mr. Duke," said Paterson, dropping his sou'wester in his
nervousness. And then he repeated what Captain Flett had already
told me.

"Did you both go into the cottage?" asked the bailie.

"No," said Jack, "Steenie ran away down to the town to tell the
doctor. I went into Mary's mysel'. But Mary was away at Kirkwall,
ye ken. I saw that some person had been there, however; for the
peats were still hot, and there was some roasted potatoes on the
table, forbye a cloth that had blood on it."

"And you waited about there until Dr. Linklater came?"

"Yes, Mr. Duke."

"Now do you recognize this as the gun you found?" Mr. Duke asked,
touching my fowling piece.

"Ay, that's just it," replied Jack.

Bailie Thomson then asked: "Have you ever seen the gun before,
Paterson?"

"No," said Jack.

"What! have you never seen Ericson with it?"

"Never," said Paterson, "though they tell me it is Halcro's gun."

"Are you sure that Ericson had not the gun with him when he knocked
you up on Friday night?" persisted Mr. Thomson.

"Yes, quite sure," said Jack.

"And where did Ericson go to after he left you?" questioned Mr.
Thomson.

"I dinna ken, Mr. Thomson. He said he was to gang back to Lyndardy.
But ye'd better ask himsel', had ye not?"

And Paterson looked round to where I sat.

Mr. Thomson seemed to have no further questions to ask, and Bailie
Duke said:

"Very well, Jack, that will do now. You may both go."

And Jack Paterson went away, followed by Barrie.

"Now, doctor, would you just let us hear what you have to say,
please?" said Mr. Duke, turning to Dr. Linklater.

The doctor kept his seat, and said:

"Mr. Drever came to me early on Friday morning and told me that
Colin Lothian had been shot dead over by Mary Firth's cottage, and
I went out. I met the man Barrio on the way, and he turned back
with me, conducting me to the spot. I found Lothian quite dead. He
had been dead quite two hours, I should say. There was a gunshot
wound in his back under the left shoulder. I got Paterson and
Barrie to take off a door in Mary Firth's room, and we carried the
body upon it down to my house. I made an examination of the body,
and extracted several swan shot from the left lung."

Dr. Linklater then passed a piece of paper containing the shot to
Bailie Duke, saying: "I suppose you need me no longer, bailie?"

"No, doctor, that's all," said Mr. Duke. "Just tell Macfarlane to
send David Flett in, will you?"

Flett came in and took his place before the magistrates, and gave
information as to the time of my leaving the Falcon on Friday
night.

Mr. Thomson, questioning him, asked:

"Do you know of any motive that the lad Ericson might have in
committing this crime? Was there any enmity between him and
Lothian?"

"Certainly not. How could ye think so, Mr. Thomson?" said my
skipper. "Why, Colin and Halcro were most friendly. It seems to me
ridiculous that anyone should ever suspect such a thing o' the
lad!"

Mr. Duke here rang his bell and told Macfarlane to bring in Tom
Kinlay.

It was a considerable time before Tom appeared, with the jailer at
his side, for he had to be brought out of the cell in which the
smugglers were imprisoned. As Flett went out, he came forward
slowly, looking pale and haggard. I noticed him start nervously as
Mr. Duke, putting forth his hand to take up his snuffbox, happened
to touch the gun.

There was some dispute between Bailie Duke and Bailie Thomson as to
which of them should first question Kinlay. But it was arranged
that Mr. Thomson should do so. He commenced by saying to Tom:

"You were taken in the North Gaulton Cave on Saturday, were you
not?"

But at this point Mr. Drever made an unexpected interruption.
Hitherto he had, during the proceedings, been quietly but busily
writing down the evidence, for use in the formal indictment which,
as I afterwards learned, Mr. Duke was to submit to the procurator
fiscal, whose deputy he was.

"Mr. Duke," said the dominie, "do you not think, in view of the
importance of Kinlay's evidence, that it is advisable to administer
the oath?"

"Ah! you're right, dominie; yes, certainly," said Mr. Duke.

"No, no," objected Bailie Thomson. "Why should this witness be
treated differently from the others?"

"Mr. Drever is right, Thomson," said Mr. Duke. "We must have the
oath."

"I see no reason for it," said Bailie Thomson. "This is not a
formal or judicial inquiry; it is a simple precognition of
witnesses."

"I think, Mr. Thomson," mildly interposed the schoolmaster, "that
you will see a little later on the necessity of it. Besides, you
must remember that Kinlay is already a prisoner on two separate
charges."

"Yes," said Mr. Duke, "both for smuggling and for having
contravened the law of treasure trove."

Then addressing Tom Kinlay he said:

"Thomas Kinlay, you will now hold up your right hand and repeat
these words distinctly after me."

Kinlay raised his hand above his head and repeated the solemn and
impressive words of our Scotch adjuration:

"I swear by Almighty God, as I shall answer to God at the great day
of judgment, that I will tell the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth. So help me, God!"

When this was done Mr. Duke leaned back in his chair and said:

"Now, Mr. Thomson, if you please."

"You were taken in the cave of Gaulton on Saturday, were you not?"
repeated Mr. Thomson, addressing Tom.

Tom sullenly answered "Yes."

"Now, tell us," the bailie continued, "when you entered that cave
with your father and the crew of the St. Magnus, whom did you find
there?"

Tom had first seen me when I was taken down to the cutter's boat,
and no doubt he had believed that it was I who had guided the
revenue men to the cavern. He, therefore, grasped at the
interpretation implied by the bailie's question, and, whether
intentionally or not, suppressed the fact that he was himself in
the cave before the smugglers arrived, he merely said:

"We didna find anybody in the cave."

"That is strange," said Mr. Thomson. "Then you saw nothing of
Ericson in the cave?"

"Nothing, sir, until I saw him in the Clasper's pinnace."

"Of course we are to understand," observed Bailie Duke, "that
Ericson might hide in the cave without being discovered by the
smugglers. Lieutenant Fox had better be questioned about his manner
of arresting the lad;" and he looked towards the officer.

Mr. Fox bent forward in his chair and said: "I first saw Ericson in
the cave when, as I believe, he saved my life by knocking a pistol
from Carver Kinlay's hand. I believe the lad was in there before
the crew of the St. Magnus."

"Then that is proof sufficient that Ericson was hiding," said Mr.
Thomson with an air of triumph.

"Halcro! come forward, will you?" said Mr. Duke, "and stand beside
Kinlay."

I did as he requested, and then I was required to take the oath as
Kinlay had taken it. Mr. Thomson looked satisfied.

"Tell us, Ericson," said Bailie Duke, taking a pinch of snuff, and
then bending forward with his elbows on the table, "tell us this:
When you bravely, and at the risk of breaking your neck, climbed
down the North Gaulton Cliff to render assistance, as you supposed,
to Thora Kinlay, did you find anyone in the cave?"

"Yes, Mr. Duke," I answered with directness, "I found Tom Kinlay.
He was alone and asleep."

"You descended the cliff without the aid of ropes, I believe?"

"Yes, sir."

"Do you know any other lad in Pomona who could have done such a
thing? Kinlay, there, for instance?"

"He might have done it, sir, but not in winter."

"How, then, do you account for Kinlay getting into the cave?"

"I suppose, sir, that he had my ropes;" and I pointed to the coil
of rope on the table.

"Now, further, do you recognize this gun?"

"Yes; it is mine."

"When did you last use it?"

"Two days before I went away in the Falcon, more than two months
since."

There was a pause here and a passing of the snuffbox. Bailie Duke
then turned to Kinlay, holding the viking's stone in his fingers.

"Have you ever had this curious stone in your possession, Kinlay?"
he asked.

"Yes; I got it from my sister," replied Tom.

"Ericson," asked Mr. Duke, "how came the stone in your possession
on Saturday?"

"Jessie and I found it at the head of the Cliff," I said. "It was
that which made me believe that Thora was in the cave. She got the
stone from me before I went away, and I thought she had maybe
dropped it as she was getting over the cliff."

"But what on earth could the lass want in the cave?" asked Mr.
Thomson.

"She was unhappy at home," I explained, "and had threatened to run
away. I supposed she had taken refuge in the cave."

"Kinlay," said Mr. Duke, touching the coil of rope, "did you at any
time make use of these lines to climb down the Gaulton cliffs?"

Tom was silent.

"If you do not care to tell us that, then, perhaps, you will say if
you happened to make use of this gun on the night on which Colin
Lothian met his death?"

Tom became perceptibly confused.

"Mr. Duke," exclaimed Bailie Thomson, "what in the world are you
driving at?"

"I'm driving at the truth, Mr. Thomson," said Bailie Duke calmly,
"and I think I see it. In the first place, you will observe, sir,
that no motive whatever has been found which would induce Halcro
Ericson to raise his hand against poor Colin Lothian. Now, on the
contrary--and I can prove this by witnesses if you wish--it is
certain that Kinlay had a quarrel with Lothian on the very day of
the murder. Lieutenant Fox, who was witness of that quarrel, will
be able to tell the reason of it. The reason was simply
this--nothing else but this, Mr. Thomson--that it was Colin who let
it out about the smuggling. It was what Lothian said in Oliver
Gray's inn that morning which led the officer to believe that
Carver Kinlay kept a store of illicit whisky in the Gaulton Cave.
Is that so, Mr. Fox?"

"It is quite true," said the officer.

"Now, it is useless to examine more witnesses in proof of what I
say. All that may be considered in detail when the case comes
before the procurator fiscal. But Mr. Drever has found one witness
whose evidence is of the greatest importance, and I will have that
witness called.

"Macfarlane, bring in Thora Kinlay.

"Ericson, my lad, sit down here with Mr. Drever."

Stepping towards the schoolmaster I faced the door through which
Macfarlane had disappeared, giving a pat of recognition to Colin
Lothian's dog as I passed it. And now that door was reopened, and
my dear school friend Thora came in.

It was the first time I had seen her since her illness. She seemed
taller and more stately, and I mutely marvelled at the delicate
beauty of her fair face and at the brightness of her deep-blue
eyes.

Our eyes met, and we simply pronounced each other's name.

"Halcro!" said she; "Thora!" said I.

And then Colin Lothian's dog sprang about her skirts in joyful
greeting, and followed her to the middle of the room.

Bailie Duke, after a consultation with Mr. Drever, called Thora to
the table and administered the oath. She pronounced the words with
grave solemnity.

"I understand, Thora," said Mr. Duke, "that you know something
concerning the death of Colin Lothian?"

"Yes," said Thora. "I know all about it, Mr. Duke."

"What! You can tell how it happened? You know who committed the
deed?"

Lothian's dog here licked her hand. She sent it away, and it
wandered about the room until it came to Tom Kinlay.

"Yes, I can tell you that," she replied.

And then she turned round, pointing with accusing finger at Tom
Kinlay, "'Twas him that did it. I saw it all. See, even the dog
kens its own master's blood!"

At Kinlay's feet crouched Lothian's dog, snarling angrily as it
looked at a stain on the young man's trousers.

Consternation filled me as I heard this terrible accusation. Mr.
Drever alone of those present seemed unmoved; he alone seemed to
have expected it. Tom Kinlay's face grew pale and haggard, and he
almost tottered as he stood there with all eyes directed upon him.

When the excitement had subsided, Mr. Duke looked towards Thora and
asked her to tell all she knew, in her own way, and to omit no
detail. She accordingly stepped a little nearer to the table,
resting her hand upon it, and gave her evidence in a clear,
unfaltering voice. Her narrative was to the following effect:

On the day of the commencement of the snowstorm Thora, who had not
been to school since her illness, went over to Clouston to visit
her young friend Hilda Paterson. When the storm came on she issued
out of the cottage and took the road as far as Stenness, and over
the undulating land of Sandwick, where the snow wreaths were
already so deep that often on her way she failed to recognize the
landmarks. She travelled in uncertainty as to the direction she was
taking, and felt utterly tired out--for she was not yet
strong--when she came unexpectedly to a little cottage, and, to her
dismay, found she had walked nearly three miles out of the direct
road home.

The cottage was a tiny building of rough stones, and the snow found
its way inside through the wide crevices in the walls. It was the
home of one Mary Firth, a lone old woman who earned her living by
knitting stockings and burning kelp. Opening the door, Thora
entered the only room. There was no one within and the fire was
dead out, for Mary Firth had gone away that morning to Kirkwall to
sell her stock of knitting. Thora was cold and hungry; she
considered it impossible to reach Crua Breck before dark, and the
snow was falling heavily, so she determined to wait till old Mary
returned. She got a few pieces of dry peat from a corner and piled
them on the hearth, then sought for Mary's flint and steel, and
proceeded to kindle a fire. Its warmth was comforting, and she sat
there on a low stool until the peats glowed hot and the kettle
began to boil.

Still Mary did not return. There was no tea to be found in the
cupboard and the only particle of food was a piece of oaten
bannock. There were a few raw potatoes, however, and Thora put some
of these in the fire to roast.

She was looking out at the falling snow through the little window,
and expecting Mary, when in the distance she saw the figure of a
man walking in the direction of Lyndardy farm, and bending forward
as he fought against wind and snow. Behind him was a dog, and she
knew at once that the man was Colin Lothian.

Now Thora had been anxious to meet the old wanderer ever since I
had told her of the wreck of the Undine, and throwing her shawl
over her head she ran out of the cottage to bid him enter and share
the meal she had prepared.

She had not gone far, however, before she observed another person
approaching old Lothian from the opposite direction. This was Tom
Kinlay, and as she recognized him she paused and slowly retreated
to the cottage without being observed, for she had no desire to
meet him, or be seen by him at that moment.

As she looked round the two men met and stood face to face. The
wind carried the sound of their voices towards her, and she heard
angry words pass between them. Yet what they said was indistinct.
She only gathered that they were quarrelling about something that
Lothian had told to the excise officers. The dog barked at Kinlay,
and he kicked the animal.

Finally, Tom allowed the old man to continue his way a few yards
and shouted after him, "Well, anyhow, you'll tell no more;" and as
he said these words he raised a gun to his shoulder and fired.

The girl saw Lothian stagger and fall. Then Tom went and knelt down
at the side of his victim as though he would complete his work with
the knife he took from his belt. But, looking nervously round in
the direction of the cottage, as though fearing that the report of
the gun might bring some one out, he hurried away in the direction
of the cliffs, carrying with him a rope which was coiled over his
shoulder.

Already Thora had left the cottage, but Tom had not observed her.
She ran through the snow towards the wounded man. The dog was
yelping and running frantically about.

The old man raised himself to a sitting posture as she stooped and
supported his head. He did not recognize her until she spoke.

"Where are you hurt, Colin?" she asked. "Do you not know me? I'm
Thora."

He tried to place his hand on his side, and fell back helpless.

"Can ye walk with me as far as Mary Firth's?" she said.

"Nay, Thora, lassie," he murmured. "I'll not walk any more. My
travelling is ower. The life flies out o' me."

Thora wrung her hands, not knowing what to do. The darkness of
night was coming on. They were far away from any dwelling, save the
little cottage, and the snow wreaths on the desolate moor were
becoming every moment more impassable.

"I will run to Stromness for Dr. Linklater," she said.

"No, lassie, no; there's no use o' doing that," said Colin. "The
doctor can do nothing. Go away home and let me die."

"No, I canna leave you, Colin," she said woefully. "And how can I
go home when my own brother has done this thing?"

"Tom Kinlay is no brother o' yours, Thora!" gasped Colin. "Nor
Carver your father!"

"What do you mean, Colin? Oh, what do you mean?" cried she. "Carver
not my father! Who is my father, then?"

"Listen!" said Colin.

But he had not strength to say more. He dropped his head back and
groaned. And then she saw that he was dead.

She took the plaid from under him and spread it over his body to
protect it from the snow. Then leaving the dog in charge of its
dead master, she hurried first to the cottage to see if Mary Firth
had returned. She wiped her hands of the blood that was on them,
and made her way through the snow to Stromness.

It was almost midnight when she arrived in the town, for her
journey had been a long and a difficult one. All the houses were in
darkness, and there was not a person to be seen in the deserted
streets. She made her way to the schoolhouse, and after much
trouble succeeded in arousing Andrew Drever.

But when the door was opened she had not strength to speak. She
fainted from exhaustion as soon as she sat down in the kitchen. Mr.
Drever gave her food, which revived her; but it was not until she
had had several hours' sleep that she could recount even a part of
what had occurred on the moor. But the schoolmaster understood this
much, that Colin Lothian was lying dead near to Mary Firth's
cottage, and, leaving the girl for a few minutes, he ran to Dr.
Linklater's and sent him to make further discoveries.

Such was the substance of Thora's evidence, though I have given it
in fuller detail than as she delivered it to Mr. Duke.

When she had been cross-questioned by Bailie Thomson the inquiry
was closed by Mr. Duke, and the case remitted to a higher court.
Tom Kinlay was thereupon taken by Macfarlane to his prison cell to
await the delivery of the formal charge of murder.

I was taking up my gun and preparing to leave when Andrew Drever
requested me to remain in order to be present at the consideration
of a further question that had arisen out of his investigations of
the case. Mr. Duke remained in his chair, talking with Thora, while
Bailie Thomson and Mr. Fox went out. Presently, however, I was
somewhat surprised to see Captain Flett enter, with Peter Brown;
and I could only conjecture that there was now to be some
explanation as to the meaning of the two boxes being on the
table--the box out of the cave and the little chest from the
Pilgrim. But what was said and done at this supplementary inquiry
may well be reserved for another chapter.



Chapter XL. Ephraim Quendale.


"Tom Kinlay is no brother of yours, Thora; nor Carver your father!"

These words were ringing in my ears. What did they mean?

I was questioning in my own mind what Colin could have meant when
Mr. Drever asked us all to sit at the table. He had some statement
to make.

Turning to Mr. Duke he said:

"In the remarkable evidence just given by Thora--I will not now
call her Thora Kinlay--you who heard it were no doubt astonished at
the revelation made to her by Colin Lothian in his dying moments."

"Yes, dominie," said Mr. Duke. "I have just been asking Thora what
Colin could have meant. Can you throw any light on the matter
yourself?"

"I believe we can throw some light on it, bailie, and perhaps you
can help me to make the matter clear."

The schoolmaster stood with his hand resting on the chest that had
been brought from the cave.

"First of all," said he, "I will ask if you remember Carver
Kinlay's arrival in the Mainland?"

"Right well do I remember it," said Mr. Duke. "He was cast ashore
in the wreck of a Danish barque about a dozen years ago, or more.
What was the ship's name, now?"

"The Undine?" suggested Mr. Drever.

"Ay, that's just it, the Undine. And Sandy Ericson found Carver in
some hole in the cliff two or three days after the wreck."

"That was so," said Andrew. "And you will also mind that Carver was
not alone in the cave. There was a child with him--a little girl."

"Yes, yes; I mind that now, Andrew. The child was Thora herself."

"And that cave was the same that the smugglers were taken in on
Saturday," said David Flett.

"The very same," said the dominie. "And this box, here, has
remained in the cave ever since the wreck. See, the ship's name is
painted on it!"

And he turned the box with the name outward. We read the word
"Undine."

The schoolmaster then opened the box and took from it a bundle of
papers and a book, handing them to the bailie.

"By these you will see, sir, that the barque Undine sailed from
Glasgow, bound for Copenhagen, and that her owner's name was
Quendale--Ephraim Quendale, of Copenhagen. The ship's book will
also show you that at Glasgow she took on board the man Carver
Kinlay and his wife, his son Tom, and an infant girl."

"The girl Thora--" put in Bailie Duke.

"Wait a bit, sir," said Andrew, continuing. "There were four
persons saved from the wreck in pilot Ericson's boat. These were
Kinlay's wife and their boy Tom, a Danish seaman, and a gentleman
passenger. That passenger, sir, was Ephraim Quendale himself, the
owner of the ship, who, from what I gather, seems to have been
returning to his native land, having been on a trip to Scotland
with his young wife and their child.

"On the morning after the wreck some bodies were washed ashore,
and, if you will remember, amongst these was the body of a
beautiful young woman, in whose arms was still clasped the
shattered body of a little child. You see, Mr. Duke, there were two
children on board the vessel, both of them girls, of about the same
age. The drowned woman was recognized by Quendale as his wife, and
she was afterwards buried with the child in the old burying ground
of Yeskenaby.

"Two days afterwards--that is to say on the fifth day after the
wreck--Ephraim Quendale and the Danish sailor left Orkney."

Here Andrew Drever put his hand in his breast pocket and drew out a
paper.

"I have here," he said, "a letter that I got yesterday from widow
Ericson. It is a letter addressed to her husband, Sandy Ericson,
and it was written by Ephraim Quendale on the eve of his departure
from Kirkwall to Copenhagen. I will read it:

"'Pilot Ericson--

"'I have been fortunate enough to find a ship in this port bound
for my own land. We sail this morning for Copenhagen, and I shall
not be able to see you to thank you personally for what you have
done for me in my hour of misfortune. But I shall be back again in
your island, please God, in a few weeks' time. I beg that you will
do me the goodness to have my beloved wife's name, Thora Quendale,
inscribed on the tombstone, and also that you will take charge of
all wreckage that may be gathered from the remains of my poor ship.
I grieve sorely that you were unable to find the body of the other
child; for I still have my doubts, notwithstanding that the woman
Kinlay was so positive that the child we buried was not her own. It
was sad that the little head was so disfigured. The eyes would have
proved all to me. My own darling's eyes were heavenly blue, like
her mother's. Should you discover the other body, I beg you will
write me a full description of its appearance and forward it by the
first ship to me, at Copenhagen, in Denmark.

"'Ephraim Quendale'"

The schoolmaster handed the letter to Bailie Duke, who read it over
to himself and asked a few questions regarding its contents.

"Mr. Quendale never returned to Orkney?" said he.

"No," replied the dominie.

"Strange. And did Pilot Ericson never hear from him?"

"Never."

"And what about the wreckage?"

"There was none of special value," said Andrew. "This box that we
have here is, I believe, the only thing of value that remained,
and, as you know, it was only discovered a few days since."

"But Kinlay appears to have known of it," observed Mr. Duke.

"Certainly he knew of it," the dominie returned; "but its value
consists in the papers it contains, most of them being in the
Danish language, which Kinlay was ignorant of. Had he known that
tongue he would doubtless have seen that a large number of the
documents are drafts upon the National Bank of Denmark, and other
claims of value."

"Very good, Andrew; we'll examine them afterwards," said the
magistrate. "There was no other wreckage? no other bodies washed
ashore?"

"No. It was while he was looking out for further remains of the
wreck that Sandy Ericson discovered Carver Kinlay in the Gaulton
Cave, and with him the child we know as Thora."

"Kinlay's own child, that is," observed the bailie.

"I believe not, Mr. Duke," said Andrew. "She is the daughter of
this Mr. Quendale, the owner of the wrecked ship."

"Indeed! You believe that, Andrew?"

"I firmly believe it."

"Had we not better send for Mrs. Kinlay, to hear what she has to
say on the matter?" said Mr. Duke.

"Mrs. Kinlay is dangerously ill. However, I was at Crua Breck
yesterday and saw her. It seems that when Sandy took the bairn to
her, she, in her excitement at its recovery, claimed it as her own.
There was no clothing on the child to identify it by, you see, and
she did not discover her mistake for some hours after Sandy had
gone. But Sandy had told her that Mr. Quendale was to return to
Pomona very soon, and Thora was kept there until her father should
come back."

"But, Andrew, man, how do you explain their keeping Thora and
bringing her up as their own bairn if, as you affirm, she was known
to be the daughter of other parents?"

"Simply in this way," said Mr. Drever; "Carver, you see, knew very
well that Mr. Quendale was expected back in Orkney. He kept the
girl, as his wife confesses, hoping for a ransom from so wealthy a
father. But having begun, very foolishly, by passing Thora off as
his own bairn, he was obliged to continue to recognize her as such
before folk, still believing that her true father would reappear."

Bailie Duke was not altogether satisfied with this explanation.

He turned to Thora and said: "Did Carver always treat you kindly,
Thora--as a father?"

Thora looked up appealingly to him, with tears on her cheek,
saying: "No, Mr. Duke. He was good to me before folk; but he was
very hard sometimes."

"And your mother--I mean Mrs. Kinlay--was she good to you?"

"She has aye been good to me; but not like a mother," said Thora,
as plaintively as a lost lamb.

"And you never suspected that she was not your true mother?" asked
Mr. Duke.

"Not till Colin Lothian spoke to me about it."

"There is certainly some mystery about all this," said the bailie,
turning to Andrew Drever. "But it remains with us to communicate
with this Mr. Quendale, if he is still alive."

"He is not alive," said Andrew, with conviction.

"Oh, then, you know something of him?"

"Yes," said Mr. Drever; and here he turned to me and asked me, to
my surprise, to relate all that had occurred during my solitary
voyage in the Falcon. I did not see what possible application this
could have to the case, or how it could be connected with the
mystery of Thora's parentage. But I related my adventure.

I told how David Flett had been knocked overboard, and of the mate
and Jerry leaving me alone on the schooner; of my difficult
navigation of her, and of my discovery of the Pilgrim. Here the
schoolmaster called the magistrate to give attention, and I guessed
that it must be with the ill-fated ship that the mystery was to be
in some way cleared. I told how I saw the supercargo seated at the
table in the cabin, and how I had read the last entry in his log
book.

Andrew Drever opened the book, which was before him, and passed it
to Mr. Duke, saying: "You will observe, sir, that the last date
written here is January, 1831. Thirteen years ago."

"Thirteen years ago!" exclaimed Mr. Duke, turning over the pages.
"Ah! now I begin to see your application. Go on, Halcro."

I then spoke of finding the charts, and described how the Pilgrim
had touched at Kirkwall.

"She called at Kirkwall to put me ashore for hospital," interposed
Peter Brown.

"What!" exclaimed Mr. Duke. "And are you going to say that this
Pilgrim was the vessel in which Mr. Quendale sailed for
Copenhagen?"

"Copenhagen was the port she sailed for--calling at Akureyri, in
Iceland," quietly explained the dominie. "Go on, Halcro."

I then described the captain's room, and told of the man I had seen
lying dead in the sleeping bunk. I spoke of the diamond ring.

"Have you got that ring?" asked the magistrate.

"Yes," I said, feeling in my waistcoat pocket and producing it from
the folds of a piece of muslin. I handed it to the schoolmaster,
whom I had not told about it before. He examined the sparkling
stones and handed it on to Mr. Duke. I saw Mr. Duke eyeing it
curiously. As he looked at the inner circle of gold a light came to
his eyes.

"Ah, hello!" said he. "There are some letters engraved here. Can
you read them, dominie? The characters are foreign. It looks like
German or Russian."

Andrew took the ring nearer to the light.

"The characters are Danish!" said he excitedly. "It is the name
'Thora Quendale!'"

"Well, all this is unmistakable evidence," said Mr. Duke. "I think
you have proved, Andrew, that this passenger on the Pilgrim and the
owner of the Undine were one and the same person. The ring is a
lady's ring. Probably it belonged to Quendale's wife."

"I think it likely that he took it from his dead wife's finger,"
said the schoolmaster, handing the ring back to me.

"No, sir," I said. "The ring isna mine. It belongs now to Thora,
and Thora shall have it;" and making my way towards her I took her
fair hand in mine.

White and smooth it was, like the hand of a lady, with long
tapering fingers and shapely nails. A strange new sensation came
over me as I held it in my own rough palm. My heart beat quicker,
and I felt myself growing red in the face.

"Take the ring, Thora, and wear it for the sake of those who have
gone before;" and I slipped the glistening ring upon her finger.

"Thank you, Halcro!" she said, very softly. "Thank you! I will wear
it for my father and mother's sake, and also for yours."

"For my sake, Thora!" and I looked down into her eyes.

There was an expression in them that I had not seen there before. I
started back with a sudden recollection. Here before me I saw the
same blue eyes, the same fair hair, the same beautiful face and
rounded neck that I had seen pictured in the locket that fell from
the dead man's hand on board the Pilgrim! Here was proof added to
proof. There could no longer be any doubt in my mind that Thora was
indeed the daughter of the beautiful woman who was cast ashore at
Inganess, and whose body now lay in the old neglected graveyard
across the moor--the daughter of Thora and Ephraim Quendale.



Chapter XLI. The Last Of The Kinlays.


Thora Quendale--as I must now call my young girl friend--returned
that evening to her old home at Crua Breck. We walked together that
far over the hardened snow; and many were the questions she asked
me concerning all that I had seen and learnt of her dead father.
What was he like? Was he tall, and great, and noble as she imagined
him? What was the colour of his hair? How old did I think he was?
And did I suppose he had suffered much in that dreadful ice prison
in the far north?

To all of which I answered as best I could, with my very slight
knowledge of the facts she was so much interested in. O, if I had
only known who that passenger was that lay dead in the captain's
room! I could perhaps have discovered more about him before the
ship went down.

As we walked side by side across the white moorland, my companion
looked again and again at the glittering ring on her finger.

"I am glad," I said, "that I happened to bring the ring away with
me."

She sighed.

"I'd rather you had brought my mother's picture. That would have
been more to me than anything else."

"Alas!" I said. "But I did not know then that it was the picture of
your mother, Thora; and I thought it would be wrong to take it from
his hand. For it was perhaps the only thing he had to look upon in
those weary long days in the ice prison that could remind him of
his happier times. I think it must have been the last thing his
eyes rested upon while his life lingered."

"Maybe you're right, Halcro," said she; "but I'd like to have seen
the picture.

"Tell me," she continued, "d'ye know where my mother's grave is?"

"Yes, well do I know it, and I'll take you to it some day when the
snow is away."

We walked along silently after this, and parted at the gate of Crua
Breck farm.

A few days after Bailie Duke's preliminary examination of
witnesses, the procurator fiscal--the official by whom such
inquiries are conducted in Scotland on behalf of the Crown--arrived
from Kirkwall. The case had already been made clear in preparation
for him, and he had little else to do than take the evidence
formally and arrange it in legal order.

The matter became somewhat involved with the action against the
smugglers, for it transpired that Tom Kinlay had, after telling his
father of the affair at the inn, been sent by Carver to spy on
Colin Lothian, and to watch the cliffs and give an alarm in case
the revenue authorities had determined to institute a plan of
attack from the land. The evidence against him was too strong to
admit of a doubt as to the ultimate issue of the examination, and a
single day's inquiry was sufficient to establish the case against
him. He was accordingly carried off to Kirkwall, and there
committed to prison on the charge of having "wilfully, wickedly,
and with malice aforethought, murdered Colin Lothian by shooting
him with a gun."

The trial was awaited with much interest by the people of the
Mainland. No one doubted that the prisoner would be found guilty of
a capital offence. The only question that gave any one concern was
the nature of the punishment that his guilt would merit.

But several weeks before the date fixed for the trial an event
occurred which made all speculation superfluous. One morning the
rumour reached Stromness that Tom Kinlay and all the smugglers had
escaped from Kirkwall jail. At first this was generally
discredited, for the building in which the men were confined was a
notably strong one; but later reports confirmed the rumour. The
authorities had trusted more to the strength of the prison than to
the vigilance of the guard; and one dark night, by the aid of some
of their comrades outside and the treachery of one of the jailers,
the prisoners effected an easy escape. Dodging through the narrow
streets they went by various ways to the harbour, and there took
forcible possession of a small brig that was lying at anchor in the
bay. Before the alarm spread the vessel was far out at sea beyond
the possibility of pursuit. The escape was well planned, and as the
brig was fully provisioned, her destination could only be surmised.

It was commonly believed that the fugitives would return to their
old trade of smuggling, and, as the men's knowledge of navigation
was known to be extremely limited, it was not thought that they
would venture upon a voyage to very distant parts.

At this time I was away on a short trip in the Falcon. We touched
at the island of Rousay, and here we learnt that some smugglers in
a strange brig had, two days earlier, made a daring raid upon one
of the small villages, robbing the inhabitants of their most
precious possessions. We heard a similar story at Papa Westray. But
it was not until our return to Stromness that we associated these
piratical raids with Tom Kinlay and his companions.

A few weeks afterwards a Glasgow barque, named the Surprise, put in
at Stromness, and reported having, on passing one of the Outer
Hebrides, rendered assistance to a wrecked vessel, which, though
bearing another name, answered exactly to the description of the
stolen brig. Among the passengers on the Surprise was Captain
Gordon, who had left his ship, the Lydia, at Greenock, and was now
on his way to Leith. He had gone out in the ship's boat to the
wreck. One of the crew was saved, an Orkney man; but the rest were
all lost, including, as we afterwards heard, young Tom Kinlay,
whose career of crime was thus brought to an early termination.

Mrs. Kinlay, who was a gentle and good woman, had much tribulation
to bear up against in the unhappy deaths of her husband and son;
and, having but little of the sympathy of her neighbours, she
resolved to leave the island. Accordingly, as soon as she recovered
her health, the farm, stock, and furniture at Crua Breck were sold,
and the unfortunate widow took passage over to Caithness, where she
remained among her relatives for the rest of her days.

A great dread came upon me when I heard that Mrs. Kinlay had left
for Scotland. I thought that Thora Quendale had gone with her, and
that I had lost sight of my dear girl friend for ever. I feared
even to ask if this was so; but passing along the road one evening,
soon after we had dropped anchor in the bay, I chanced to meet
Andrew Drever walking home with a string of trout hanging at his
side.

Having exchanged a few friendly remarks with me, he asked if I
would go and spend the evening with him.

"Come and take some supper with us, lad," said he. "Thora will be
glad to see ye."

"Thora!" I exclaimed.

"Ay, Thora. Did you not know Thora lives with us now?"

"No; I thought she had gone to Caithness with Mrs. Kinlay."

"Nay, nay," said Andrew; "Thora can look after herself now, since
we heard from Copenhagen. But come along as soon's you can, and
we'll tell you all about it."

And with that he trudged away humming a lightsome tune.



Chapter XLII. A Choice Among Three.


Not many minutes after I left the schoolmaster, when I was passing
by the wharf, I met Jack Paterson. Jack was standing looking down
into the water, with his two hands deep in his trousers pockets,
and his face bearing an expression of curious indecision.

"Hello, Jack, what's troubling you now?" I asked, approaching him.

"Troubling me! Well, I suppose it is troubling me, too. The fact
is, Ericson, I've been asked to take command of the new pilots."

"Well, man, that's surely nothing to look so gloomy about, is it?"

"No, lad; and I wouldna trouble sae muckle if I could see my way
clear to takin' the offer. But, ye see, Halcro, I canna do the
piloting without a boat."

"I see, I see. Ay, Jack, but that's a pity, man. And ye canna get
the money towards buying the St. Magnus?"

"No; the St. Magnus is for sale, I weel ken that, and she's a right
good boat. But where can a poor crofter body like me get the
siller, think ye?"

"'Deed, I dinna ken, Jack; but maybe the siller will come somehow.
There's many a one in Orkney would advance it for you, surely.
Dinna be cast down about it, man. What about your crew?"

"Weel, I was thinkin' of yersel for one, Halcro?"

"Of me!"

"Ay, and Jimmie Crageen, and Ronald Ray from Kirbister, and Steenie
Barrie; all o' them good honest men and weel acquainted wi' the
Orkneys. What d'ye say, Halcro? Will ye join us?"

"I canna say, Jack. Ye see there's the Falcon. I couldna leave
Davie Flett very well; though I'll not deny I'd rather be a pilot
than anything else."

"Weel, ye'll think of it any way; and if we can get the money,
there's no doubt but we'll manage the business right enough."

With that I left Jack on the wharf and continued my way, meditating
upon this chance of fulfilling my ambition of being a Pomona pilot.

I had not gone far, however, when I heard a quick step behind me.

"Ericson, Ericson!" some one called.

I turned and saw Lieutenant Fox following me in full uniform, and
with a young midshipman attending him. He came up to me, and, after
a few ordinary observations, said:

"I wanted to ask you something, Ericson. We're short-handed on the
Clasper, and we need the help of a man who knows these islands
well; someone who knows all about the people, and can be of service
in keeping down the smuggling. Now, what d'ye say? Will you join us
yourself?"

"I'm afraid not, Mr. Fox," I replied, for I had already half made
up my mind about the piloting, and with true Orkney instinct I
clung to the old ways of my family. "I'm afraid not, sir. You see
I'm aboard the Falcon just now, and if I leave Davie Flett it will
only be to join the new pilots.

"But if you're needing a hand," I continued, thinking just then of
Willie Hercus, "I can get you a lad that knows just about as much
of the Orkneys as I do, one that has always wished to be a
man-o'-war's man."

"I'd rather have yourself, Ericson," said the officer. "Just think
about it, will you? It's a good opening for you, and you may yet
reach the quarterdeck and become an admiral, and fly your own
pennant before you're as old as Davie Flett. Let me know as soon as
you decide. But if you can't join us, send your friend. Good
evening!"

As the young lieutenant walked away with a great clattering of his
long sword, I looked at his laced cocked hat and his epaulettes,
and fancied myself in a similar uniform. However, my native
simplicity came to my rescue, and, good as this opportunity of
serving my Queen appeared, I yet thought fondly of the pilot's
busy, perilous life. Something told me that it was my destiny to be
a pilot, as my fathers for three generations had been before me.

I went into Oliver Gray's inn, and there found my skipper, Davie
Flett, awaiting me. He was talking with a little old man, whom I
soon recognized as Isaac the Dutch Jew, who had bought the viking's
ruby from Tom Kinlay. When I entered, Isaac retired to a far corner
of the parlour and watched me closely as I talked with Captain
Flett.

"When do we sail, captain?" I asked, as I sat down beside the
skipper.

"Tomorrow night," said he.

And I judged that I should now have to determine without delay
which of the three appointments I should take--remain with Flett,
join the revenue cutter, or become a pilot.

"I've just been speaking with Lieutenant Fox of the Clasper," I
said. "He wants me to go into the revenue business."

"Ay! and so you're to be a blue jacket, eh?" mused Flett, without
offering any objection to my leaving the Falcon.

"No," I replied, "I'm not sure yet that I'll join them, captain.
The fact is, I have also seen Jack Paterson, and he wants me to
become a pilot."

"That's more in your line, my lad. Tak' my advice and join the
pilots. Ye'll do better as a pilot than anything else. It's in your
blood. As for the Falcon, I said when you came aboard us that you
could easily leave if you chanced upon something better. We can
soon get another lad to fill your berth. Maybe ye ken a lad yersel'
that would come aboard us?"

"Ay, that I do," I responded. "There's Robbie Rosson, he'd be glad
of the chance."

"Bring him to me then, Halcro, and we'll take him along with us
next trip to see if he likes it."

Here was a fortunate opportunity. By my own advancement I was to be
the means of helping my two school companions. Willie Hercus was to
join the revenue cutter; Robbie Rosson was to go aboard the Falcon.
As for myself, I may say that it was a foregone conclusion with me
that I should take to the piloting.

"Has Paterson got a boat yet, Halcro?" asked the skipper.

"No, that is his one difficulty. He wants the money. I wish I could
only get some money from somewhere."

Captain Flett lapsed into silence, as though, acting in his
customary fashion, he was contriving in his mind how best to secure
a pilot boat for Jack Paterson. Presently the old Jew edged nearer
to us and said to me:

"Did I hear you say you vant money, mine young friend?"

"That's a thing a good many folk want," said I. "Why?"

"Vy? Oh, just because I tink you have got someting vort a great lot
of money. Dot little black stone you showed me; long time ago, you
know."

Here Captain Flett interposed, speaking with Isaac in Dutch. A long
conversation followed in that language, during which Flett asked me
for my viking's stone. The old Jew took the talisman in his long
fingers. He regarded it as though he were familiar with its
structure, twisting it round and screwing the thin band of gold
that encircled it. Then a very wonderful thing happened. He gave
the stone a few taps upon the table and the metal ring fell off.
The stone dropped open in two pieces like a shell, and in the heart
of it appeared a bright clear gem that sparkled in the light of the
oil lamp hanging above us. I looked on in dumb amazement.

This stone, Jarl Haffling's talisman, that I had carried about with
me so long, fondly believing that it had the power to protect me
from all perils, was it no talisman after all? I doubted it now.
Whatever dangers I had gone through had been surmounted by no aid
from this supposed amulet, but simply by my own endeavours. But
useless as it no doubt was in this particular, I could well imagine
that the bright diamond which had been so cunningly enclosed within
its hard stony shell might be of considerable value.

That it was of great value I soon discovered from what the old
Hebrew informed me. He took from his inner pocket a tiny pair of
scales, and proceeded to weigh the glittering jewel in the balance.
Then he made some calculations on a dirty piece of paper, speaking
as he did so in Dutch with Captain Flett.

"D'ye want to sell the thing, Halcro?" said the skipper. "He says
he canna buy it himsel', but he kens its value. He's the agent of a
diamond merchant in Amsterdam."

I hesitated to answer, reflecting upon my need of money. My mother
was poor; I could help her by selling this thing, and then, if I
should get for it more than sufficed for her immediate needs, was
there not this pilot boat to buy? I might be able to become part
owner of the St. Magnus.

"What does he say the diamond is worth?" I asked of Flett.

The sum he named astonished me. I could scarcely contain my wonder
at the thought of it.

"Five hundred guineas," answered Flett.

Five hundred guineas! Why, that was a fortune.

"Would you give me that much for it?" I asked, looking at old
Isaac.

"Ah! mine young man, you tink me rich. I could not offer you five
hundred shilling for the stone. I only tell you it is vort so
much."

He thereupon replaced the gem within its covering of stone, drew on
the band of gold again, and returned to me my talisman in its
original condition. Then he drank the gin that was in the glass
before him, and put back his little scales into his pocket. Before
leaving us he handed me a little card on which was inscribed the
name of a diamond merchant in Amsterdam.

"You are a sailorman," he said, buttoning up his coat. "You may be
in Amsterdam one day. If you go to dat address dey vill buy the
stone from you; but do not take one groschen less dan five hundred
guineas. Good day, mynheer!"

And he went out.

"Weel," said Davie Flett, "I must say that's a queer auld fellow."

"He seems to have turned honest," I said.

"The auld scoundrel has taken a liking for you, Halcro," said the
skipper, smiling.

"But," said I, "I almost wish he had bought the diamond."

"Nonsense, lad! keep it and bide ye're time. Besides, you forget
the dominie's 'Law of Treasure Trove'"

"Ah, yes, I suppose I would only be entitled to a third of the
money after all," I said. "But what about the pilot boat?"

"That will be all square, my lad. Did they not tell you that I had
bought the St. Magnus?"

"No! do you really mean that, captain?"

"Certainly I mean it. And you and Jack Paterson can start the
piloting as soon's ye like."

That night, as I sat at Andrew Drever's fireside talking of Jarl
Haffling's talisman, Thora Quendale told us how, when one day after
her illness she was sitting in an armchair, with the stone dangling
by a string from her hand, she fell asleep before the warm fire.
She was awakened by hearing a footstep in the room; it was Tom
Kinlay's. She felt for the stone, but it was gone. Tom had stolen
it. This was how it came into his possession. Evidently it was by a
mere accident that he left it at the top of the cliff, before going
down to the cave, after the death of Colin Lothian.

That night, too, Andrew Drever told me, as he had promised to do,
how he had received news from Copenhagen concerning Thora; how the
insurance money on the ship Undine and on Mr. Quendale's life was
to revert to Thora. This would surely make her a wealthy woman. But
the business connected with this, and the inheritance of her
father's real and personal property, required that Thora should go
to Copenhagen to establish her claims in person at the chancery
courts of Denmark. Mr. Drever was interesting himself specially on
her account in the capacity of a guardian, and he was soon to
accompany her to Denmark and leave her there, probably for several
years.



Chapter XLIII. Thora's Answer.


It was a fresh, breezy, August afternoon. In the open sea, far out,
east of the Skerries, we were scudding along blithely, with a flock
of seagulls flying wantonly in our wake. The low hills of the
Orkneys rose like a faint haze on the horizon to westward. Light
waves, touched with green, curled over into snowy spray about our
sides as our boat bent over and plunged buoyantly through them.
Blue was the far-stretching sea, and bluer still the summer sky.

Away to the eastward, whither our bowsprit pointed, a white-sailed
clipper grew larger as we approached her. The Danish ensign flew at
her mizzen; the familiar signal for a pilot streamed from her fore
peak. My heart beat quicker, telling me who was aboard this fair
vessel as nearer and nearer we drew. Now we could distinguish the
tiny figures moving about her yards, as one by one her studding
sails were taken in.

Sitting in the stern sheets of my own pilot boat, I watched and
watched for some sign on the ship's quarterdeck. At last a white
object appeared over the rail, waving with regular motion. I took
out my handkerchief and unfurled it in reply, still with faster
beating heart.

"Lower away, my lads!" I cried, putting the helm to starboard.

"Ay, ay, sir," responded Willie Hercus, who had left the Clasper
and was now our mate. Then down fell our sails, flapping loud in
the breeze, and out went our long sweeping oars.

We crept in under the vessel's counter; a rope was thrown to us,
and in a few moments I was on her quarterdeck, standing all
trembling and nervous before a tall beautiful woman, whose
deep-blue eyes and fair, breeze-blown hair were all that I could
see--everything else was lost to me.

"Halcro!" she exclaimed, holding out her two sunburnt hands in
greeting.

"Thora!" I murmured, taking her hands in mine.

"You have expected me, then?" she said, as I drew her gently to the
rail to let the sailors pass.

We stood there, looking into each other's face, in which the four
years that had passed since our last meeting had left their
maturing touch.

"I have been expecting you these two months past," I said, looking
wistfully over the sea. "There has never come a ship from Denmark
but I have boarded her, hoping to see you."

"Well, you see me at last, and am I altered?"

"You are only more beautiful, Thora, more womanly. And so you are
coming back to Pomona to visit us again?"

"No, not to visit you, Halcro. I am homeward bound this time. I am
never going to leave old Orkney again. My schooling is over, and
there is no one left in Copenhagen now to keep me there. I am going
to settle down in some cottage near our dear sea cliffs, where I
can see the ships passing from my garden seat and dream my life
away in pleasant solitude."

"In solitude!" I stammered; then shyly asked:

"Did you not get my last letter, Thora?"

"What! the one in which you told me of Jessie's marriage to Captain
Gordon, and that the dominie had retired from his school, and that
you were promoted to captain, and had called your new boat the
Thora? Yes, certainly, I got it."

"But there was something else I said in it, Thora--something more
important to me than these things you speak of. Did you not read
that part?"

Thora looked meekly down at the white planks of the deck, her
cheeks growing rosy and her breath coming quick. Then turning her
eyes aft towards the steering wheel, she said, crossing the deck:

"Captain Ericson, do you not think you should be attending to the
piloting of this ship?"

"No," I said, following her across to the lee side, where the great
mizzen sail shielded us from the view of others on board. "No; my
mate, Willie Hercus, is looking after that. I am off duty today. I
am here not as pilot; I have come out to welcome you home."

Then, after a long silence, during which we both looked overboard
upon the dancing waves, where the porpoises rolled in play, and the
gulls dipped lightly on balanced wings, I said:

"Thora, you did not answer all my letter when you wrote. You were
not offended, were you, by what I said?"

"I know what you mean, Halcro," she said, resting her hand upon the
rail and turning her eyes full upon me, "I was not offended, or I
should not now be here. I did not answer you in writing. I have
come to answer you in person."

She put her hand in mine, and added the one word:

"Yes."

And that was the answer that Thora spoke on that summer day, long
ago, as we stood together on the ship that brought her over from
the home of her fathers to the land in the northern seas that was
more truly her own. And the ship sailed on, over the blue waters
and through breezy sounds and among verdant isles; into sunlit
fiords, where the sea birds flew; on, under the dark weatherbeaten
cliffs and lofty rocks, where the cormorant sat perched on high.
And at last, as the dusk of the evening gathered and the light of
the sunset silvered the waters, down went the chain with rattling
noise, and we came to an anchor in the peaceful haven of Stromness.

THE END.



Notes.


i According to the standard of value in 1843, the ingot of
silver, weighing six ounces, would be worth 1 pound, 13s., 0d.

ii Peerie = little.




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PILOTS OF POMONA: A STORY OF THE ORKNEY ISLANDS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

