


SATAN

By

LEWIS SPERRY CHAFER

1909







Contents


Foreword, by Dr. C. I. Scofield

Author's Introduction

   I. The Career of Satan
  II. The Ages
 III. The Course of This Age
  IV. This Age and the Satanic System
   V. The Satanic Host
  VI. Satan's Motive
 VII. Satan's Methods
VIII. The Man of Sin
  IX. The Fatal Omission
   X. Modern Devices
  XI. The Believer's Present Position
 XII. The Believer's Present Victory




Foreword.


If any word of mine shall add to the number of the readers of this book
I shall be glad to have written it; and I sincerely wish that all
believers, and especially all ministers and Christian workers, might in
some way be led to read it.

The subject is vital to any right understanding of the age in which we
live, and of the personal conflict which we wage; for the existence,
personality, and power of Satan are awful facts and of immense present
significance.

We walk in the midst of his snares, hear on every hand his doctrines
proclaimed by men of blameless lives "transformed as the ministers of
righteousness," and are allured by the pleasure, place and power of his
perfectly organized world-system.

I know of no other book on Satan in which the dispensational aspects of
the subject are so clearly stated, nor any other so severely Biblical.

C. I. Scofield.




Introduction.


The world has been willing to comply with the wishes and projects of
Satan to the extent of ceasing to believe that he really exists; this
unbelief being most advantageous to his present undertakings. Yet the
opinions of men have never changed the facts of revelation, and,
according to Scripture, Satan exists; still possessed with great power
and influence over the affairs of men--a power and influence to be
increasingly dreaded as this present age advances.

The teachings of Scripture on this important subject are but little
understood by Christians and seem to be entirely outside the thought of
the world. It is, therefore, to be expected that any attempt to present
this truth will seem, to many, mere folly and fiction.

The name Satan has by no means been lost. It has, however, been
associated with a most unscriptural fancy. Without reference to
revelation, the world has imagined a grotesque being, fitted with
strange trappings, who has been made the central character in theatrical
performances; and by this relation to the unreality of the theatre, the
real character of Satan has come to be only one of the myths of a bygone
age.

Scripture reveals a detailed description of the person and career of
Satan; beginning with his creation; his original condition; his fall,
and on to his kingdom with all its developments, and his final defeat
and banishment. It presents a personage so mighty and so prominent in
the world to-day that the Christian heart would fail, were it not for
faith in the One who has triumphed over all principalities and powers.

This attempt to outline the Scripture teaching on this character will be
undertaken under certain general conditions:

First--The authority of the Scriptures of both the Old and the New
Testaments will be accepted without question.

Second--Evidence will be drawn from the Word of God alone, since no
final light can be found on this subject other than it has pleased God
to reveal in the Bible.

Third--There will be no discussion as to the actual existence of Satan;
this being both assumed and taught from Genesis to Revelation.

These pages are prepared especially for believers; knowing that this
body of truth will be wholly unnoticed or rejected by the Satan-blinded
world (2 Cor. 4:4).

There has also been a deep sense of the seriousness of the undertaking:
both because Satan, by his present direct power, would, if possible,
hinder any larger understanding of his projects and purposes; and
because so great a warning has fallen from the lips of Christ against
the sin of ascribing to Satan the things which are really of God (Matt.
12:22-32). The work has, therefore, been undertaken with some degree of
reliance upon the keeping and guiding power of the Spirit of God, and is
presented with the prayer that believers may have a clearer
understanding of this important body of truth and be able to say with
Paul, "We are not ignorant of his devices." It is also desired that
some clearer vision of this mighty foe may be had which will cause the
child of God to realize the overwhelming power of his adversary and be
constrained to "be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might;"
that greater victory may be had in the realization of the whole will of
God.




Chapter I.

The Career of Satan


This chapter is a brief outline of the past, present and future of
Satan, which is taken up at this point both that the following chapters
may be more easily studied and because of the fact that those passages
which deal most directly with his earliest condition are closely
interwoven with predictions of his future and final defeat.

Revelation in regard to Satan begins with that dateless period between
the perfect creation of the heavens and the earth (Gen. 1:1) and the
desolating judgment which ended that period, when the earth became waste
and empty (Gen. 1:2; Isa. 24:1; Jer. 4:23-26). One passage, Ezek.
28:11-19, deals at length with Satan and his relation to that age. In
this Scripture Satan is evidently described under the title of "The King
of Tyrus." Like the Messianic Psalms,--wherein the Psalmist is
apparently referring to himself, though statements are made and
conditions described that could only be connected with the Messiah, the
Son of God,--so, here, that which is addressed to "The King of Tyrus"
is, by its character, seen to be a direct reference to the person of
Satan; for no similar person to whom this description could apply is
revealed in Scripture. In the previous as well as the following chapters
the final judgment of Jehovah is pronounced upon the enemies of His
chosen people. Satan is distinctly numbered among these enemies in I
Chron. 21:1; and his record and judgment naturally appear in this list.

Every sentence of this extended passage is a distinct revelation and is
worthy of long and careful study. Only a passing reference can be made
to it here. The passage is as follows:

"Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, take up
a lamentation upon the King of Tyrus, and say unto him, Thus saith the
Lord God; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in
beauty. Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone
was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the
onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle and
gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in
thee in the day that thou wast created. Thou art the anointed cherub
that covereth; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain
of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.
Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day thou wast created, till
iniquity was found in thee. By the multitude of thy merchandise they
have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned:
therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I
will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of
fire. Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast
corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I will cast thee to
the ground, I will lay thee before Kings, that they may behold thee.
Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thy iniquities,
by the iniquity of thy traffic; therefore will I bring forth a fire from
the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to ashes
upon the earth in the sight of all them that behold thee. All they that
know thee among the people shall be astonished at thee: thou shalt be a
terror, and never shalt thou be any more."

This passage describes much of the early and latter career of Satan.
Twice is his creation referred to. In verse fifteen it is stated that he
was created perfect, and in verse thirteen that perfection is set forth
in detail by the suggestive symbols of precious gems. He was also "full
of wisdom," "perfect in beauty," filling up the sum of perfection. In
verse fourteen he is called the "anointed cherub that covereth." By this
the purpose of the Creator is revealed. The general interpretation of
this verse is that Satan was created as a guard or protector to the
throne of the Most High. This is reasonable. Like the golden cherubim,
covering the visible mercy seat in the Holy of Holies of the earthly
tabernacle, he was created a guard and covering cherub to the heavenly
center of Glory. It is expressly stated that he was located by the Most
High upon the holy mountain of God, the mountain of God being a symbol
of the center of God's power, government, and eternal throne (Ps. 48:1;
68:15; Isa. 2:2). Over this exalted throne Satan was set as a covering
cherub. He is also said to have been in "Eden, the garden of God," which
is evidently another Eden than that in which Satan appeared as a
serpent. It is probably a reference to the primitive creation, and the
whole passage suggests a position of great authority for which he was
created and anointed; a position from which he fell, drawing with him a
host of beings over whom he had governing influence and power.

Again, it is stated that Satan was perfect in all his ways from the day
he was created. It is important to notice both that he was created, and
that he was created perfect. Since he was created, he is not
self-existent, and never can be free from his dependence upon the
Creator. He may vainly propose to become independent, and even be
permitted for a time to act under that delusion; but that would only
delay the inevitable judgment that awaits him. He was created perfect,
or was a perfect fulfilment of the Creator's intention. Satan was a free
moral agent; capable of choosing evil, but not obliged to do so. That he
chose evil must ever be his own condemnation; for the Creator had
surrounded him with sufficient motives to choose the good.

The crime of Satan is partly revealed in verse sixteen and this is
followed by an exact description of his final judgment as it is
predicted in the book of Revelation.

The important teaching of this passage is of Satan's first position and
power--a power and wisdom sufficient to guard the throne of God from
every possible enemy, and a glory and beauty that would become the
highest officer in the Court of Heaven. By this revelation his present
position and power may be estimated.

The revelation next in importance is that of his crime; this is clearly
set forth in Isa. 14:12-20. Before reading this passage it should be
noticed that the prophet's vision of Satan, here recorded, is from the
time of his final judgment, and the prophet is looking backward over
Satan's whole career. Much that is still future is, therefore, referred
to as though it were past. The passage is as follows:

"How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! How art
thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou
hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my
throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the
congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights
of the clouds; I will be like the Most High. Yet thou shalt be brought
down to hell, to the sides of the pit. They that see thee shall narrowly
look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the
earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms; that made the world as a
wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house
of his prisoners? All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie in
glory, every one in his own house. But thou art cast out of thy grave
like an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain,
thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a
carcass trodden under feet."

Here Satan appears under a different title. When he is seen in the
primal glory, as described in Ezekiel 28:11-19, he bears the earthly
title of "The King of Tyrus" and when fallen from that sphere, he bears
the heavenly title of "Lucifer, Son of the Morning." It is as though,
being out of harmony with the Creator by his sin, he is out of harmony
with every sphere in which he may appear. This glorious heavenly title,
"Lucifer, Son of the Morning," speaks of his first place in the
celestial sphere, when the morning stars sang together and all the sons
of God shouted for joy (Job 38:7). It would indicate a position near to
the unsurpassed glory of "The Bright and Morning Star," "The Sun of
Righteousness" who shall yet arise with healing in His wings.

Satan is here again said to be fallen from heaven. Of this fall Jesus
speaks in Luke 10:18, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven."

The reference in both of these passages is not to Satan's moral
degeneration but rather to a great event when he was, because of his
sin, driven from his place in glory and made to inhabit the earth and
air (Eph. 2:2; 6:12; I Pet. 5:8). Yet he was granted the privilege of
access to the presence of God (Job 1:6; Rev. 12:10).

Referring to these texts: In the first two chapters of the book of Job,
Satan is seen appearing in the midst of other heavenly beings, before
the presence of Jehovah; and there seems to be nothing unusual in the
presence of Satan in this celestial company. To the question of Jehovah,
"Whence cometh thou?" he replies, "from going to and fro in the earth
and from walking up and down in it." From this revelation the important
information is given that Satan, while inhabiting the earth and air, is
free to appear in the presence of God. His occupation of the earth and
air is also taught in Eph. 6:11, 12. Here believers are addressed as
follows: "Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil. For our wrestling is not against flesh
and blood, but against the principalities, against the powers, against
the world rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual host of
wickedness in the heavenlies" (R.V.). Another injunction to believers is
contained in I Pet. 5:8, 9: "Be sober, be watchful: your adversary the
devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour:
whom withstand steadfast in your faith."

These two latter passages, taken together, restate with greater emphasis
the revelation in regard to the present abode of Satan. That the earth
and the air are his present abode must be accepted on the testimony of
Scripture: in spite of the almost universal impression that he is now in
hell.

In addition to this statement in regard to Satan's fall, the passage in
Isaiah, which is under consideration, reveals two aspects of his present
activity. He is first seen seeking to establish a throne for himself,
and then as the promoter of confusion and terror in the Divine purpose
in the world. This is followed with another statement of the certainty
of his final judgment and banishment.

The crime of Satan is concisely stated in the fourteenth verse as being
a purpose in his heart to become _like_ the Most High. His heart was
lifted up because of his beauty; he who was created and placed as the
"Covering Cherub," with the high honor of guarding the throne of God,
has corrupted his wisdom by reason of his brightness; he has struck at
the throne he was set to protect. It was a purpose in his heart which
would require the time of the ages to wholly destroy. There could be
but one Most High, and the purpose of Satan to become like him could,
naturally, be nothing less than an attempt to dethrone the Almighty.

The secret purpose in his heart reveals his method to be, not a violent
attack upon the throne: but, like Absalom's, to steal the hearts of the
unfaithful in the kingdom, and, through subtlety, to gain a government.
He would thus become an object of worship, and attract attention from
other beings to himself. To accomplish this, a hindering attitude must
be assumed toward the purpose and projects of the Most High. No adequate
appreciation can be formed of Satan's present projects and devices, and
the motive that prompts them, without a clear understanding of his
age-abiding attitude toward the Person of God.

There are two prominent events revealed in the history of Satan, falling
within the period of time when he proposed in his heart to become like
the Most High, and his yet future banishment and execution. The first of
these was his meeting with and triumph over the first Adam; when he
wrested the scepter of authority from man, by securing man's loyal
obedience to his own suggestion and counsel. This earthly scepter Satan
held by the full right of conquest, seemingly without challenge from
Jehovah, until the first advent of the Second Adam; this meeting of the
Second Adam, Christ, with Satan being the second great event which is
revealed during this period in his career. Only the unfolding of the
coming ages can reveal the magnitude of this terrible conflict. A
glimpse is revealed from time to time of the unceasing effort of Satan
to triumph over the Second Adam, as he had done over the first. He met
Him in the wilderness, offering Him all he had gained from the first
Adam, even the kingdom of this world; if only he might become like the
Most High, and receive the obedient worship and adoration of the Second
Adam, the Son of God. Again he is seen voicing his attempt to dissuade
the Christ from His sacrificial death, through the impetuous Peter; and
still again in the crushing attack upon the very life of Jesus in the
Garden, when, it would seem, Satan attempted to take that life before it
could be offered for the sins of the world.

However victorious Satan may have been over the first Adam, it is
certain that he met a complete and final judgment and sentence in the
Second Adam; and that bruising of the serpent's head was realized which
was a part of the Adamic covenant. Referring to His Cross, Jesus said,
"Now is the judgment of this world, now shall the prince of this world
be cast out" (Jno. 12:31). And again in Jno. 16:11, "Of judgment because
the prince of this world is judged." Still another Scriptural testimony
to this great defeat of Satan is recorded in Col. 2:13-15: "Having
forgiven you all trespasses; blotting out the handwriting of ordinances
that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the
way, nailing it to the cross; and having spoiled principalities and
powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it." It
is, therefore, clear that, though Satan may have triumphed over the
first Adam and thereby become the god and prince of this world; he
himself was perfectly and finally triumphed over and judged by the
second Adam in the Cross.

It is quite possible, however, that a sentence may be pronounced and
made known some time before that sentence is actually executed. During
such an interval a criminal is said to be under sentence awaiting his
execution, which some higher authority has decreed. This period of
sentence is that in which Satan appears in the present age; which age
had its beginning with the Cross. Execution of this sentence would have
banished him forever. That he is not banished is revealed in the fact
that he, even after his judgment in the Cross, is referred to in
Scripture as still being in authority over this world.

An illustration of Satan's present relation to this world may be taken
from the history of Saul and David. It is natural that David, the first
to occupy the Davidic throne, should be a type of Christ, the last and
most glorious occupant of that throne (Luke 1:31-33). As there was a
period between the anointing of David and the final banishment of Saul,
in which Saul reigned as a usurper, though under Divine sentence and
David was the God-appointed king: in like manner there is now a similar
period in which Satan rules as a usurper, though under sentence; and the
actual occupation of the throne by Christ is still future. In this
period Satan, the rejected monarch, still rules; hunting to the death
all those who have allied themselves with Christ, the God-anointed King.

Why Satan is thus allowed to continue his reign is perhaps but partly
revealed. The real Church which is the Bride of Christ, is to sit with
Him upon His throne (Rev. 3:21; I Cor. 6:2, 3; Matt. 19:28), and the
present age must continue until that glorious heavenly people are
gathered out from the world by regeneration. Again, it seems the course
of Divine wisdom to make a sufficient and final trial of every claim of
His adversaries; and when this age, with all its developments, shall
have passed by, every mouth will be stopped, and the whole world and
Satan will know their own failure and sin before God. They will stand
self-condemned; and nothing could accomplish this but the testing, by
actual trial, of all the self-sufficient claims of Satan and man. The
sin of man has brought him under sentence too; and grace alone withholds
his immediate execution (Jno. 3:18; Rom. 5:18, 19). Though the day of
execution is, in the purpose of God delayed; it is, nevertheless, sure;
and the time is fast approaching when an awful destruction of
self-enthroned beings will be executed; and He alone shall reign, whose
right it is to reign; "for He must reign until He hath put all enemies
under His feet" (I Cor. 15:25). The Kingly Son shall yet arise and claim
the nations of the earth and "break them with a rod of iron, and dash
them in pieces as a potter's vessel" (Ps. 2:9).

It would seem that Satan cherishes the expectation of actually
accomplishing his purpose until near the end of his career (though the
demon testimony of Matt. 8:29 is suggestive on this point). Preceding
his banishment to the pit, he is violently cast out of heaven and into
the earth, according to Rev. 12:7-12; and his activity, from that time
on is limited to that sphere. He is no longer granted access to God. The
passage is as follows:

"And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the
dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not; neither
was there place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast
out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the
whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast
out with him. And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come
salvation and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of His
Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accuseth
them before God day and night. And they overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives
unto the death. Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in
them. Woe to the inhabitants of the earth and of the sea! for the devil
is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he
hath but a short time."

Here Satan is pictured as being in great wrath as he is banished from
heaven into the earth, "knowing that he has but a short time." After
this short time, which is a terrible tribulation in the earth, Satan is
bound and cast into a pit; this being an event in the glorious return of
Christ to the earth, where He will reign on the throne of His Father
David for a thousand years. Satan is confined to the pit during the same
period, at the end of which he is released for "a little season." He
then gathers an army for a last and terrible attack upon the government
and people of God, which ends in his being banished to the lake of fire,
where he meets his final and long predicted doom. These events are
clearly stated in their order in the nineteenth and twentieth chapters
of Revelation.

Satan is thus revealed as having been first created perfect in all his
ways, mighty in power, and full of beauty and wisdom. While thus
privileged, he proposed a stupendous project in his heart--himself to
become like the Most High. Though cast down and yet having access to
God, he is seen wresting the world scepter from man; and ruling as the
god of this world, until the judgment of the Cross; and after that he
still rules as a usurper. At the end of the age he is cast out of his
access to heaven, into the earth; from thence to the pit; and, finally,
is banished to the lake of fire forever.

This review of the career of Satan is made at this point in order to
call attention to the direct and mighty influence he exerts upon the
affairs of this world according to his varying positions and freedom.

After Satan rebelled, humanity, too, was thrown into an abnormal and
almost universal attitude of independence toward God; and this continues
beyond the Cross with increasing confusion and darkness, to the end of
the age. The only exception to this rebellion is the little company of
believers; and how terribly real is the tendency to the self-governed
life of the old nature, even among these! When Satan is cast out of
heaven and limited to the earth, there is tribulation upon the earth of
which Jesus speaks in Matt. 24:21, and which is also referred to in Dan.
12:1. When Satan is bound and put in the pit, and the promised Kingdom
of Christ has come, there is peace covering the earth as waters cover
the face of the deep.

Can it be doubted that this mighty being is a living power, acting
directly over the affairs of men, even in this self-glorying age?




Chapter II.

The Ages.


It is a conspicuous fact that the comparatively few errors and
inconsistencies in translation, found in the English Authorized Version
of the New Testament, serve to hinder, directly or indirectly, any clear
understanding of the teachings of Scripture in regard to the conditions
and relationships of the world at the present time. Even the revision
did not greatly relieve this confusion beyond the addition of some
helpful marginal renderings. It would seem, if it were possible, that
Satan, the author of confusion and the only one advantaged by it, had
been able in some subtle way to keep in darkness that which would
otherwise be light; thus preventing a revelation of his own projects.

The continuation of these misleading translations is most evident in the
unqualified use of the English word "world." The word which, in common
usage, has a limited meaning is used, by the translators, as the one
English rendering for at least four widely differing ideas in the
original. So that, if the truth contained in this important body of
Scripture is to be understood, the student must not only know the
various meanings which are expressed by the one word, but also be able
to determine the correct use of the word in any single instance. This
necessary effort to understand the real meaning of many passages has,
therefore, placed the simple truth they contain beyond the average
reader of the Bible.

The English word "world" as used in the New Testament may mean a
distinct period of time, commonly known as an age (as its original is a
few times translated); or it may refer to the things created: the earth,
its inhabitants, or their institutions. Two of these original meanings
are used in connection with this present time. First, as to an age, or
period of time:

The ages are often referred to in Scripture, and the study of the exact
conditions and purposes of each of them is not fanciful: but is rather
the only adequate foundation for any true knowledge of the Bible. Not
all the ages can be taken up in this Chapter, but only such as may be
confused with the present one.

The age of law, which began with the giving of the law at Mount Sinai
and ended, approximately, with the death of Christ, is mentioned by
Zacharias in his prophecy at the birth of John: "As he spake by the
mouth of his holy prophets which have been since the _age_ began" (Lu.
1:70). The same period is referred to by Peter in Acts 3:21: "Whom the
heavens must receive until the restitution of all things, which God hath
spoken by the mouth of all his prophets since the _age_ began." These
references, it will be seen, are not to the creation of the world, as
the English rendering would indicate; but to the beginning of that
particular period in which the prophets spake.

The present age of grace, in which the grace of God has had its
appearing unto salvation, began where the age of law ended, or with the
death of Christ; and will continue until He comes again. The duration of
this age is suggested by the communion table, which, being peculiar to
this age, will continue to its end. Of this sacrament it is said: "As
oft as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's
death till he come" (I Cor. 11:26).

As a distinct period of time this age is mentioned by the word "world"
no less than forty times in the New Testament. A few of these passages
follow: "And whosoever speaketh a word against the son of man, it shall
be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Spirit, it
shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world (age), neither in the
world (age) to come" (Matt. 12:32). "And as he sat upon the Mount of
Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall
these things be? and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the
end of the world (age)?" (Matt. 24:3). "The field is the world (men);
the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the
children of the wicked one; the enemy that sowed them is the devil; the
harvest is the end of the world (age); and the reapers are the angels"
(Matt. 13:38, 39). "And, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of
the world (age)" (Matt. 28:20). "For the children of this world (age)
are in their generation wiser than the children of light" (Lu. 16:8).
"And set him at his own right hand in the heavenlies, far above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world (age), but that which is to come" (Eph.
1:20, 21). "We should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present world (age)" (Titus 2:12). By these and many other passages, it
may be seen that the present age is a particular limited period of time
in which special conditions are to prevail, and definite purposes are to
be realized.

Judging from the mass of Christian writings and from utterances in
public address and prayer, this age is assumed by many, without
question, to be the Kingdom of Christ; though no Scripture is found to
warrant that conclusion.

There is a kingdom of God which embraces the entire universe, over which
God is enthroned, and to this kingdom every enemy must finally be
brought back to original subjection and adjustment, or be banished
forever. This final victory is described in I Cor. 15:24, 25: "Then
cometh the end, when He (Christ) shall have delivered up the kingdom to
God, even the Father; when He shall have put down all rule and all
authority and power. For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies
under His feet."

There is a still more extensive body of Scripture which anticipates a
literal kingdom of righteousness and peace upon the earth; this theme
being the burden of the Old Testament prophets, and was announced by
John Baptist, by Christ and His disciples. This announcement was simple
and plain: "The kingdom is at hand." The expression "at hand" here used
is significant; indicating not necessarily the immediate future, though
the kingdom was definitely offered to that generation; but that the
earthly kingdom was the next event which had been clearly announced by
the prophets. When the Messiah had been positively rejected by the Jews,
He began, alone, without even the sympathy of His disciples, to unfold
this forthcoming mystery-age, which had been kept secret in the councils
of God, and which was more perfectly revealed to Paul, the first
messenger to the Gentiles. Of this revelation of a hitherto unknown age,
Paul writes in Eph. 3:1-11: "For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of
Jesus Christ for you Gentiles, if ye have heard of the dispensation of
the grace of God which is given to me to you-ward: how that by
revelation he made known unto me the mystery; (as I wrote afore in few
words, whereby, when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the
mystery of Christ) which in other ages was not made known unto the sons
of men, as it is now revealed unto His holy apostles and prophets by the
Spirit; that the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body,
and partakers of His promise in Christ by the gospel: whereof I was made
a minister, according to the gift of the grace of God given unto me by
the effectual working of His power. Unto me, who am less than the least
of all saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; and to make all men see what
is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world
hath been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ: to the
intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly _places_
might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God, according to
the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord."

The same truth is emphasized in Rom. 16:25: "Now to him that is of power
to stablish you according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus
Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept
secret since the world began."

This new age of the Gentiles was also to have its hope centered in Jesus
Christ, but in His sacrificial death rather than His kingly reign. It
was to be an age in which the Gentiles were to be visited and a people
called out from them for His own Person (Acts 15:14); and these people,
who are the real Church, were to be built together upon a rock (Matt.
16:18); their glorious salvation and final heavenly perfection were to
rest only on His perfect and finished work for them. By this Divine
transformation, He would secure, out of all nations, both Gentiles and
Jews, a heavenly people; wholly fitted in quality to be His own body,
His heavenly bride, and a kingdom of priests unto God.

All this, though not revealed in past ages, was known in the councils of
God (Acts 15:18) and is parenthetical in the history of the Jew. It is a
delay of their earthly kingdom and in no way its fulfillment or
substitute.

Want of knowledge of the right divisions of truth is also evident in the
general impression that God has cast off His people, the Jews, and that
the Gentiles are their rightful successors and the recipients of the
blessings of their unfulfilled prophecies. This confusion is due to a
failure to distinguish between this and the following age.

Two distinct lines of seed were promised to Abraham. One, an earthly
seed, to be like the dust of the earth, without number (Gen. 13:16),
centered wholly in the earth by a relationship of physical generation:
the other seed were likened to the stars of heaven, without number
(Gen. 15:5), centered wholly in the heavenlies by a relationship of
Spirit regeneration, which is the present answer of God to all true
Abrahamic faith (Rom. 4:1-5). The earthly people found their origin in
the physical fatherhood of Abraham: while the heavenly people find
theirs in the shed blood of Christ. One had an earthly history from
Abraham to their dispersion among the Gentiles--a history which will yet
be resumed and the everlasting covenants fulfilled in the faithfulness
of God: the other has a transient earthly pilgrimage from the Cross to
their completion; when they will be caught up to meet and marry their
Bridegroom, and be forever with the Lord (I Thes. 4:13-17).

To one, Christ is the coming glorious Messiah, who will actually sit
upon the throne of His father, David (Lu. 1:31-33), in a literal earthly
kingdom (else all Scripture language fails): to the other, He is the
glorious Head of the Body, and coming Bridegroom. One of these lines of
seed are the favored subjects in the earthly kingdom: while the other is
to be in His bosom as a bride, and be associated with Him in His reign
(I Cor. 6:2; Rev. 3:21).

As these two lines of seed are everywhere distinct, there must be at
least two separate ages for the accomplishment of these ends. What,
then, are these ages?

If it is believed that an earthly kingdom, with Messiah as King, is
promised the Jew, it must also be admitted that the Jew is not now
enjoying that kingdom; nor has he had any semblance of a kingdom in all
the centuries since his dispersion among the Gentiles. This age cannot,
therefore, be the predicted earthly kingdom of Christ. Turning to Acts
15:13-18, a description of the present age and that which will follow is
found. The passage is here given: "And after they had held their peace,
James answered, saying, Men and brethren, hearken unto me: Simeon hath
declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of
them a people for his name. And to this agree the words of the prophets;
as it is written, after this I will return, and will build again the
tabernacle of David, which is fallen down; and I will build again the
ruins thereof, and I will set it up; that the residue of men might seek
after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, saith
the Lord, who doeth all these things. Known unto God are all His works
from the beginning of the world."

It is recorded that, after His resurrection, Jesus was seen for forty
days by His apostles whom He had chosen; and during this time He was
speaking to them concerning the _Kingdom_. It was natural, therefore,
for them to inquire, at the end of those days, "Lord, wilt Thou at this
time restore again the kingdom unto Israel?" (Acts 1:6) and they had
full warrant from the prophets to expect that great event when their
Messiah came. They had not, however, grasped the meaning of the then
dawning age of the gathering out of the Bride, and in this passage they
are seen adjusting themselves to the newly revealed Divine program, and
recognizing the God-appointed delay in the predicted earthly kingdom.

In Acts 15: just referred to, the purpose and order of two distinct
ages is set forth. The first age is described as the "visiting of the
Gentiles," that from among them a heavenly people may be called out, and
is a description of this present age, which had its beginning in the
very generation in which this passage was written; for no previous age
could meet these conditions. The second age, here described, is that of
a distinct rebuilding of the Davidic order, which is clearly separated
from the former age by the return of Christ. This same order of events
is also carefully maintained wherever these events are referred to in
Scripture, and any confusion of the order is a positive violence to the
truth. The revealed consummation of this Gentile age is always the
return of Christ, who comes first to receive His own; and then to render
judgment upon all the nations and to bind the enemy and place him in the
pit. The same return of Christ is the necessary preliminary event before
any kingdom of righteousness and peace can be realized upon the earth.
No amount of enlightened sentiment can establish a kingdom without a
king; and no universal blessedness can be experienced in this world
until the enemy is dethroned and banished. Sadly has the world failed to
include these two necessary Divine movements, in its vain dream and
godless attempt at a perfected universe!

The purpose of this age is then clearly defined as the visiting of the
Gentiles to call out of them a people for His name; the called out
people being the true Church (as that word signifies), which is made up
of all the saved ones who have been saved since the Day of Pentecost, at
which time the Spirit came to unite them into one body and to indwell
them. They are the heavenly people, regenerate and complete in Christ,
their Bridegroom and living Head.

When this age is considered as the Kingdom of Christ it is usually
thought of as in a state of development. This is a necessary conclusion
in view of the presence of sin and failure in the world. But the setting
up of the earthly kingdom is never described as the result of a process.
Scripture deals conclusively with this question.

In Dan. 2:34-35, an image is described, which is defined as being a
symbol of the then dawning Gentile world power (which is still
continuing, Lu. 21:24). The image is here made to represent both the
development of world rule and its terrible and final ending. The image
is seen to be gradually developing from one world government to another
until the form of the image is wholly completed. Its ending is then
precipitated by a shattering blow from a Stone, "cut out without hands."
By the same inspired interpretation, the "Stone" becomes both a symbol
of superhuman power, being "cut out without hands;" and a type of
Christ, the Ancient of Days, in His coming to the earth as a resistless
Monarch; banishing all rule and authority. A portion of the whole
passage reads thus: "Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without
hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay,
and brake them to pieces. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the
silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the
chaff of the summer threshing-floor; and the wind carried them away,
that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image
became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth" (Dan. 2:34-35).

This being a Divinely interpreted prophecy as to the extent and ending
of the present Gentile age, it should be noted that the Stone (Christ)
strikes the image (the world power) with one destructive blow, and at
the time when it has become fully developed. The blow is struck on the
part of the image which is last formed. The great image is thus
instantly and violently broken to pieces and is even blown away "like
the chaff of the summer threshing-floor." In like manner, according to
this prophecy, the whole Gentile rule will suddenly be broken and will
vanish.

It should also be noted from these symbols that the Stone does not
"become a mountain and fill the whole earth" until the great image has
been scattered to dust. From this it is certain that there can be no
development of the Kingdom of Christ on the earth before the final
breaking of the kingdoms of the earth. This same order is recognized
throughout all prophecy. The king suddenly returns as lightning shining
from one part of heaven to the other; Satan is violently seized and cast
into prison; and a nation is born at once. The second Psalm connects the
kingly reign of Christ--the time when He is set upon the holy hill of
Zion--with the time when He shall claim the nations of the earth and
"break them with a rod of iron and dash them in pieces as a potter's
vessel." Also in Matt. 25:31, "when He sits on the throne of His glory"
the "blessed of the Father" are called to enter the kingdom prepared for
them from the foundation of the world. And in Rev. 12:7-12, where Satan
is cast out into the earth and the execution of his sentence is begun,
the announcement is made by a great voice in heaven, "Now is come
salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of
His Christ." There is no evidence of a gradual process here; all is
sudden and decisive.

Again, this age is not the coming earthly kingdom for nowhere are the
promised conditions of that kingdom now to be found. The Old Testament
prophecies contain long and detailed descriptions of that glorious time;
God's ancient people shall become the chosen nation, restored to their
own land; the enemy shall be banished; the earth shall be purified, and
blossom as a rose. "The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the
leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and
the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them. And the cow
and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together, and
the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking child shall play
on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the
cockatrice den. They shall not hurt or destroy in all my holy mountain:
for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover the sea" (Isa. 11:6-9). "And in that day will I make a covenant
for them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and
with the creeping things of the ground: and I will break the bow and the
sword and the battle out of the earth, and will make them to lie down
safely" (Hos. 2:18). "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the
mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow with milk,
and all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters, and a fountain
shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of
Shittim" (Joel 3:18). "Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I
come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord. And many
nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people:
and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that the Lord
of hosts hath sent me unto thee" (Zech. 2:10, 11). "Thus saith the Lord
of hosts; in those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take
hold out of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the
skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you: for we have
heard that God is with you" (Zech. 8:23). "For behold, I create new
heavens and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor
come into mind. But be ye glad and rejoice forever in that which I
create: for, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a
joy. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the
voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.
There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that
hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old;
but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed. And they
shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards,
and eat the fruit of them" (Isa. 65:17-21). "Then the eyes of the blind
shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall
the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing: for in
the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert" (Isa.
35:5, 6). "But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel. After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God
and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they
shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them,
saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember
their sins no more" (Jer. 31: 33, 34). "For unto us a child is born,
unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon His shoulder:
and His name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The
everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of His
government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David,
and upon the kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and
with justice from henceforth even forever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts
will perform this" (Isa. 9:6, 7). "He shall be great, and shall be
called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto Him the
throne of His Father David: and He shall reign over the house of Jacob
forever; and of His kingdom there shall be no end" (Lu. 1:32, 33). "And
He shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the
outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the
four corners of the earth" (Isa. 11:12). "And He shall judge among many
people, and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their
swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks: nation
shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war
any more. But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig
tree; and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of
hosts hath spoken it" (Micah 4:3,4).

Though blessings abound in the individual heart where Christ is
enthroned, yet not one trace of this glorious transformed earth can be
found in the present Gentile age.




Chapter III.

The Course of This Age.


It is necessary to distinguish between rightly dividing the word of
truth, and a critical attitude toward that word; the former being an
important duty in the believer's life, according to II Tim. 2:15, while
the latter may easily become a wicked and misleading display of unbelief
and the wisdom of this world (I Cor. 1:19).

Personal interest in the Word of God usually begins with the first
understanding of its real divisions; and no one is prepared to
understand the providence of God who does not first come to know
something of the purpose of God as marked off by these great divisions.
Especially is this necessary, as has been stated, for any clear
understanding of the present age.

Again, the power and force of the whole body of Scripture must depend,
in a large measure, upon a belief in unfulfilled prophecy. Such a belief
is not general, even among Christians. They believe that Christ camp in
the flesh, suffered, died, and rose again, because that is all now a
matter of history; but that belief is not greatly influenced by the fact
that this was all exactly foretold by the prophets. Let those who are
free to condemn the pious Jew for not recognizing the fulfillment of
prophecy in the first advent of Christ, beware lest they fail to rightly
interpret the signs of these times, or look with positive unbelief upon
the stupendous events that, according to prophecy, are imminent to-day.
It seems a sore test of faith to believe that which is predicted for the
present age, though those predictions are being fulfilled in every
particular. This prevailing attitude of unbelief usually arises from one
of two errors; either Satan has been so estimated that it seems
impossible for him to be the promoter of anything that is moral or good
(of this error more will be said in the following chapters): or the
exact meaning and purpose of this age has been disbelieved or
misunderstood; and because of these conditions many enthusiastic
Christians are found to be, not only working toward unscriptural and
hopeless ends, but are actually contributing to the confusion and
darkness that is prevalent to-day.

The purpose and course of this age are not matters of prediction alone.
Almost two thousand years of history may be considered in the light of
these predictions; and while the age is not yet complete, and much that
is reserved for the last days is still future, enough of prophecy has
now been fulfilled to indicate the certain fulfillment of all.

Since there has been no universal conversion of men in even the most
favored locality, it is evident that, thus far, there has been a
separating and calling out of a few from the many; and the Divine
purpose, as revealed in Scripture, which is to gather out a people from
the Gentiles for His own name, has been verified. The blessing of God
has been upon world-wide evangelism: rather than upon any fruitless
attempts at world-wide conversion; for the individual or church that
has become self-centered has, to that degree, sacrificed the power and
blessing of the presence of Christ which was promised in Matt. 28:20:
"Go ye therefore, and disciple all nations"--"Lo, I am with you alway,
even unto the end of the age."

Again, the formation of the Kingdom has not been discernible in the
present age. The Jews, to whom alone the promises of an earthly kingdom
belong, have continued a separate people under the unseen hand of God,
without a country, or a vestige of national life. Certainly none of the
predicted and necessary events accompanying the establishment of their
kingdom have been experienced, nor is there any trace of its promised
blessings. The fact that some Jews are now organizing and looking toward
their native land, argues nothing for this age, more than that its end
is very near, and that the way for their coming Messiah and national
glory is being prepared. Just so, the conspicuous fact that all the
marvelous present development of the resources of the earth has been
limited to about the last eightieth of the present history of the age is
evidence that the earth's return to her former glory is already in
preparation.

Belief in the revealed course of this age is, therefore, based upon
history as well as the predictions of Scripture.

The present age is different from all others by reason of the admixture
of opposing classes of people; there being two distinct divisions (not
including the Jew as a nation) living and acting together, who are,
nevertheless, removed from each other by a degree that is immeasurable.
This fact necessitates many careful distinctions and special
injunctions which are peculiar to the age.

The fact that these two widely differing classes are present together,
and are to continue so to the end of the age, is the teaching of the
seven parables in the thirteenth chapter of Matthew. Very much,
therefore, depends upon the correct interpretation of these parables.
Their meaning has been somewhat hidden by the use of the word "world"
where reference is made to this period of time; and the fact that the
conditions described are true of this age only, has not been generally
realized.

These seven parables are but a description of the unfolding and
development of these mixed elements to be found in Christendom
throughout this age. The same program is again proclaimed by Christ,
from the Glory, in the messages to the seven churches of Asia (Rev. 2
and 3). Here are seven letters to organized existing churches; yet these
messages also reveal an exact outline of the history of Christendom for
this entire age; and there is perfect agreement in order and detail
between the parables of Matthew 13 and the letters of Revelation 2 and
3. The first two parables are interpreted by Christ Himself, and the
interpretation of these sheds light on all that remains.

Christ is the sower in both the first and second of these parables, and
the sowing is continued by His messengers throughout this age. The field
is the world of men, which reveals a marked change from the
responsibility of the Jewish age that was then closing; and the results
of the sowing are most definite: not all the good seed sown comes to
fruitage; and the wheat and the tares grow _together_ until the end of
the age. This interpretation is not fanciful, for it is given by Christ
Himself; and the following parables must necessarily agree with these.
The third and fourth are of the mustard seed and the measure of meal.
Though commonly interpreted to mean the world-wide development of the
Church and the permeating influence of the Gospel, in the light of the
interpretation of the previous parables they can mean only the mixture
of evil with that which began as small as a mustard seed and as pure as
meal. The fifth parable is of a treasure hid in a field, which pictures
the earthly people in the world; while their real relation to Christ is
covered until the accomplishment of that which is revealed in the sixth.
Here the same man, the Lord Jesus Christ, sells all that He hath to
purchase the Church, the pearl of great price, for He "loved the Church,
and gave Himself for it" (Eph. 5:25); the pearl, by its formation and
its power to reflect the light, being a wonderful type of the Church in
her present formation and future place in glory. Both the treasure and
the pearl are found in the world, but do not include all of the world.
The last parable but restates the truth that the mixture of the good and
the evil is to continue to the end of the age.

The highest ambition of the great missionary, Paul, was to be all things
to all men that he might save _some_, not _all_. He found that his
preaching was a savor of "death unto death" as well as of "life unto
life" (II Cor. 2:15, 16), and he clearly states in II Tim. 3:13, "And
evil men shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived."
Christ also predicted that the end of this age should be marked by such
sin as provoked the judgment of the flood: "But as the days of Noe were,
so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. For as in the days that
were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving
in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and knew not
until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming
of the Son of man be" (Matt. 24:37-39).

This truth is often rejected as being pessimistic and disloyal to the
progress of the world: yet has not the history of the age verified the
teaching? And is not the coming glory nearer and more certain when
depending upon His promised return in resistless power and splendor,
than when depending upon any human progress the world has ever known?
One is the majestic movement of the Divine program in fulfillment of
every covenant: while the other is the vain dream of the world in its
ignorance and disregard of the testimony of God.

Because of the presence of these two classes in the world in this age,
there are two very distinct lines of Scripture descriptive of them. One
body of Scripture directly applies to and governs the "wheat" or
heavenly people, and one applies to the "tares," the "children of the
evil one." The marvelous revelation of the believer's relation to Christ
and the heavenlies, and his deliverance from any actual identification
with this age, though in it, will be the subject of another chapter.
Only the relation of the unregenerate to this world and to Satan will be
continued here.

As it has pleased Satan to hide himself and all his projects from the
unbelieving world, that which God has revealed in all faithfulness will
be received only by those who have unquestioning confidence in His Word.

According to Scripture, the relation of the unbelieving to Satan is far
more vital than a mere pleasure-seeking allegiance. On two occasions
Jesus spoke of the unsaved as the "children of Satan" (Matt. 13:38; Jno.
8:44), and Paul so addressed Elymas, the sorcerer, according to Acts
13:10. The same class is also twice called the "children of
disobedience" (Eph. 2:2; Col. 3:6), and once it is called the "children
of wrath" (Eph. 2:3).

It is evident that these are descriptions of the same class of people,
since both terms are employed together in Eph. 5:6: "Let no man deceive
you: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the
children of disobedience." The exact cause of that wrath is stated in
Rom. 1:18 (R.V.): "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hinder the truth in
unrighteousness;" the word "hinder" being the same as is used in II
Thes. 2:7, where the Holy Spirit is said to be restraining the working
of lawlessness in this age. Therefore, the willing neglect and disregard
for the testimony of God by the world, has allied them with Satan, and
placed them under the wrath of God, which must find its righteous
execution in due time if grace is not accepted.

Again, Satan is revealed as directing and empowering the children of
disobedience: "And you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses
and sins; wherein in times past ye walked according to the course of
this age, according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit
that now worketh in the children of disobedience" (Eph. 2:1, 2). The
real force of this passage, also, is dependent upon the meaning of one
word; the word "worketh" being the same as is used in Phil. 2:13, where
God is said to impart His wisdom and strength to the believer: "For it
is God that _worketh_ in you both to will and to _do_ of his good
pleasure." Additional light may be had as to the reality of this
relationship from the following passages in which the same original word
is used: "And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same
God that _worketh_ all in all" (I Cor. 12:6); "But all these (gifts)
_worketh_ that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man
severally as he will" (I Cor. 12:11); "And what is the exceeding
greatness of His power to usward who believe, according to the working
of His mighty power, which He _wrought_ in Christ when He raised Him
from the dead, and set Him at His own right hand in the heavenlies"
(Eph. 1:19-20); "For He that _wrought effectually_ in Peter to the
apostleship of the circumcision, the same was _mighty_ in me toward the
Gentiles" (Gal. 2:8); "Whereunto I also labor, striving according to His
working, which _worketh_ in me mightily" (Col. 1:29); "Now unto Him that
is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think,
according to his power that _worketh_ in us" (Eph. 3:20). It is also
said in regard to the energizing power of Satan, using the same original
word: "For the mystery of iniquity doth already _work_" (II Thes. 2:7);
"For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by the
law, did _work_ in our members to bring forth fruit unto death" (Rom.
7:5). In the last two passages quoted, the meaning is, like the
preceding passages, of an imparted energy, and is, therefore, most
suggestive.

It may then be concluded from the testimony of Scripture that Satan
imparts his wisdom and strength to the unbelieving in the same manner as
the power of God is imparted to the believer by the Holy Spirit. There
is, however, no revelation as to the comparative degree of strength
imparted by each. It should be further noted in this connection that
this impartation of energizing power from Satan is not toward a limited
few who might be said, because of some strange conduct, to be possessed
of a demon; but is the common condition of all who are yet unsaved, and
are, therefore, still in the "power of darkness."

The relation between the unregenerate and Satan is still more vital,
according to the original from which I Jno. 5:19 is translated. The
Revised Version renders it, with marginal note, as follows: "We know
that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in the evil one." In this
passage there are two startling revelations in regard to this
relationship. First: the word "in" is the same as is used everywhere of
the believer when he is said to be _in_ Christ, and in the case of the
believer it signifies an organic union to Christ--as a branch is _in_
the vine, so the believer is _in_ Christ. Though the word, when used of
the unregenerate, probably cannot mean the same degree of organic
life-relationship as exists between Christ and the believer, yet it
does denote a deep relationship; and Satan is the light, inspiration,
and power, of all those whom he energizes.

The second revelation in the passage is found in the word "lieth"--"The
whole world lieth in the evil one." It might as well be translated
"lieth asleep;" for its condition is not only a fixed position _in_ the
evil one, but is also a condition of unconsciousness. The saved ones are
said to be in the Father's hand where no created thing can pluck them
out (Jno. 10:29), and underneath are the everlasting arms: so the great
mass of unsaved humanity is in the arms of Satan; and by his subtlety
they are all unconscious of their position and relation. This is not at
all strange. Even the believer has no present power to discern his
glorious position and security in the Father's hand, apart from the
assurance of the written Word. Much less, then, can the unbeliever come
to realize his own position in the arms of Satan, when, under the
direction of Satan, he gives no heed to the testimony of God.

Still another passage should be noted in this connection. In II Cor.
4:3, 4, Satan is described as the god of this world, blinding the minds
of the unbelieving. The whole passage is as follows: "And if our gospel
is veiled, it is veiled in them that perish: in whom the god of this age
hath blinded the thoughts of the unbelieving that the light of the
gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God should not dawn
upon them" (R.V. with margin). In this passage the unconscious condition
is said to be the direct result of the power of Satan, and the blindness
of their thoughts, it is stated, is along one particular line. To them
the _gospel_ is veiled; and the gospel here referred to is not the whole
life story of Jesus, nor is it the "Gospel of the Kingdom;" but the
message of good news or favor; the exact terms of Salvation by grace
alone. This Paul here calls "our gospel," for to him it was first
unfolded in its completeness.

The unregenerate are, then, unconscious of their position in the arms of
Satan, and blind in their thoughts toward the gospel of mercy and
favor,--their only hope for time or eternity. Satan, like a fond mother,
is bending over those in his arms, breathing into their minds the
quieting balm of a "universal fatherhood of God" and a "universal
brotherhood of man;" suggesting their worthiness before God on the
ground of their own moral character and physical generation; feeding
their tendency to imitate the true faith by great humanitarian
undertakings and schemes for the reformation of individuals and the
betterment of the social order. God's necessary requirements of
regeneration are carefully set aside, and the blinded souls go on
without hope, "having the understanding darkened, being alienated from
the life of God through the ignorance that is in there, because of the
blindness of their heart" (Eph. 5:18). How important, as a preparation
for salvation, is the illuminating work of the Spirit in conviction, by
which He lifts the veil and opens the mind to a new vision of the
redemption and glory that is in Christ! Without this God-given vision
there can be no understanding of the way of life, nor any intelligent
decision for Christ.




Chapter IV.

This Age and the Satanic System.


It may also be concluded from the study of the ages that God has not
been pleased to meet the presumptuous claims of Satan or of man by a
simple denial of those claims; He has chosen, rather, to bring
everything to an experimental test. One advantage of this method is
obvious: every mouth will be stopped, and the entire universe of beings
will see clearly the utter folly of that which might have been
arbitrarily denied. Man can no longer claim that his conscience is
sufficient to guide him to his highest destiny; since the whole race,
when standing on that basis before God, so utterly failed that their
destruction, by a flood, was necessary: in like manner, by the history
of a most favored people in the age preceding the first advent of
Christ, man has demonstrated his own inability to do right or to keep
the law. In the present age, man proves his separation from his Creator
by his spirit of self-sufficiency and positive rejection of God. The
present issue between God and man is one of whether man will accept
God's estimate of him, abandon his hopeless self-struggle, and cast
himself only on God who alone is sufficient to accomplish his needed
transformation. All Divine love, wisdom, and power have wrought to make
these conditions open to man; and when this last and supreme effort of
God has been rejected, the final pleading with man must be forever
past, and the long delayed judgment upon sin be executed in
righteousness.

It has already been pointed out that Satan purposed in his heart to
attempt all the functions of God; and, according to Scripture, that
which he purposed is being permitted, to the extent of his ability,
throughout the course of this age. Though his failure and defeat have
been predicted from the beginning, yet it has pleased God to permit the
Satanic ambition to come to its own destruction, and to demonstrate its
own weakness and wicked folly. No other solution is given of the present
power of Satan and the terrible manifestations of his increasing
authority yet to be experienced in the closing scenes of this age.

His present authority is by no means complete. In II Thes. 2:7 it is
stated: "The mystery of lawlessness doth already work: only there is one
that restraineth now, until he be taken out of the way." This is a
description of the work of the Holy Spirit as He restrains and hinders
the development of the power of evil. Nor can Satan direct the affairs
of that part of humanity who have been delivered from the power of
darkness and are now united to Christ (unless they yield to his wishes);
though they are in the world and their earth lives are mingled in much
of its history. These saved ones are the antiseptic salt, hindering,
like the Spirit who indwells them, the untimely dissolution of humanity.
Again, Satan's dominion is limited in that "there is no power but of
God: and the powers that be are ordained of God" (Rom. 13:1). In this
Scripture it is revealed that Satan, though in authority, is not wholly
free from his Creator, and that any direction of the governments of the
world which he exercises is by permission from God. Therefore, the
efforts of Satan and man are not supreme, but must come to their
predicted end when the eternal purpose of God has had its realization in
the gathering out from the Gentiles of the heavenly people for His own
name.

A few tremble in the face of the social and industrial problems of the
day; while the vast majority are confident that the sagacity of man is
not only controlling iniquity, but is gradually developing an improved
social order. Thus, man, in his vanity, assigns to himself that which is
of God alone, for all the elements of corruption and tribulation are
latent in the world to-day, and the mighty effort of God is required to
stay its bursting into flame until the appointed time. Tribulation will,
therefore, instantly begin when the hand of God is removed from the
unregenerate and Satan-ruled humanity.

Though under the restraining hand of God, Satan, according to Scripture,
is now in authority over the unregenerate world, and the unsaved are
unconsciously organized and federated under his leading. The fact that
there is such a federation, although stated in Scripture, is obscured in
translation. In at least thirty important passages the English word
"world" is again used without qualification. In these passages reference
is made to a great evil system or order over which Satan is in
authority, the word "world" referring to the world of men, their evil
undertakings, ideals and federation. This federation includes all of
the unsaved and fallen humanity; it has the co-operation of the fallen
spirits, and is but the union of all who are living and acting in
independence of God. This Satanic system has its own ideals and
principles which are in sharp contrast to the ideals and principles
given the redeemed: yet these two classes must mingle together as
closely as the ties of human life can come.

The whole truth concerning this federation is contained in those
passages wherein the Satanic system is mentioned.

First, Satan is its governing head. Three times Jesus referred to Satan
as the prince of the Satanic system: "Now is the judgment of this world:
Now shall the prince of this world (_Satanic system_) be cast out" (Jno.
12:31). "Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the prince of this
world (_Satanic system_) cometh, and hath nothing in me" (Jno. 14:30).
"Of judgment, because the prince of this world (_Satanic system_) is
judged" (Jno. 16:11). Paul also refers to Satan as the "prince of the
power of the air" (Eph. 2:2), and again as the "god of this age" (II
Cor. 4:4). In the latter passage, mention is made of the age or period
of time only, as in Eph. 6:12: "For our wrestling is not against flesh
and blood, but against the principalities, against the powers, against
the age rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual hosts of
wickedness in the heavenlies" (R.V.).

From these Scriptures it must be conceded that the offer, which Satan
made to Christ, of the then inhabited earth, was very real. The
Scripture is as follows: "And the devil, taking Him up into an high
mountain, showed Him the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. And
the devil said unto Him, All this power will I give thee, and the glory
of them: for that is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I will I give
it. If Thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be Thine" (Lu. 4:5-7).
It has sometimes been held that the claim of possession of the earth was
a lie, this being asserted on the ground that Satan is exposed in
Scripture as a liar. Such a conclusion is impossible for at least two
reasons. It would have been no temptation had he not possessed the
kingdoms he offered; and any such false claim would have been
immediately branded as a lie by the Son of God. He is still further
revealed as the recognized head of this world system in two additional
passages: "Because greater is he that is in you than he that is in the
world (_Satanic system_)" (I Jno. 4:4). "And we know that we are of God,
and the whole world (_Satanic system_) lieth in the wicked one" (I Jno.
5:19).

Returning to Isaiah 14:12-19, wherein Satan is described as "Lucifer,
the son of the morning," and where the prophet in vision sees the whole
career of Satan in retrospect, it will be seen that Satan holds a mighty
grip upon the world. Here it is said of him that he was the one who
"didst weaken the nations" and who "made the earth to tremble, that did
shake kingdoms, that made the world as a wilderness and destroyed the
cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners." Every
phrase in this remarkable passage is a revelation. Undoubtedly there is
reference here both to the fall of man and to the authority of Satan in
the earth, as well as to his attitude of resistance toward salvation
which is by the grace of God, since it is said of Satan that he "made
the world as a wilderness; he opened not the house of his, prisoners."

Second, the Satanic system, according to Scripture, is wholly evil. This
is a hard saying; and is usually denied by those who do not realize that
all Scripture estimates are made from the standard of the holiness of
God; and that the Satanic system, of itself and apart from the influence
of God and His people, has never improved their own moral condition, but
that they are individually under condemnation before God (Jno. 3:18);
their borrowed interest in morality and charity being a poor
commendation, in view of their fallen and Christ-rejecting attitude
before God. They are also incapable of comprehending the standards of
God, whose thoughts and ways are above their thoughts and ways as the
heavens are higher than the earth (Isa. 55:8,9). The quality and
incapacity of the fallen race is accurately described in Rom. 3:10-18;
this description of them being as they appear before the holiness of
God, stripped of all externals: "As it is written, There is none
righteous, no, not one: there is none that understandeth, there is none
that seeketh after God. They are all gone out of the way, they are
together become unprofitable; there is none that doeth good, no, not
one. Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have
used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips: whose mouth is full
of cursing and bitterness: their feet are swift to shed blood:
destruction and misery are in their ways: and the way of peace have they
not known: there is no fear of God before their eyes." So, fallen
humanity, federated under Satan, will appear and act when the
restraining hand of God is removed. Though the unsaved are moral,
educated, refined, or religious, they are not _righteous_ in God's
sight; for the charge here brought against them is that "there is none
righteous, no, not one;" and "_all_ have sinned and come short of the
glory of God." The following Scriptures which directly refer to the
character of the Satanic system are, therefore, the estimate of God upon
those conditions which the world holds to be ideal: "Whereby are given
unto us exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be
partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in
the world (Satanic system)" (II Pet. I:4). "For if after they have
escaped the pollution of the world (_Satanic system_) through the
knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the
beginning" (II Pet. 2:20). "Pure religion and undefiled before God and
the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world (_Satanic
system_)" (Jas. 1:27). "Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that
the friendship of the world (Satanic system) is enmity with God?
Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world (_Satanic system_) is
the enemy of God" (Jas. 4:4). "For whosoever is born of God overcometh
the world (_Satanic system_)" (I Jno. 5:4). "Hereafter I will not talk
much with you: for the prince of this world (_Satanic system_) cometh,
and hath nothing in me" (Jno. 14:30). "And every spirit that confesseth
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and this is
that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come;
and even now already is it in the world (_Satanic system_)" (I Jno.
4:3). In like manner the believer is said to have been "delivered from
the present evil age" (Gal. 114) and "delivered from the power of
darkness" (Col. 1:13) and is not to be conformed to this age (Rom.
12:2).

These judgments are made from the view-point of the purity and holiness
of God. In His sight the highest moral, educational, and religious
ideals that the unregenerate world can comprehend are but a part of the
confusion and darkness of this age when coupled with a rejection of His
testimony in regard to His Son as their atoning Saviour.

Thus, it is presented from the Scripture that the present age and its
great federation is, in God's sight, most unholy.

Third, Satan is also set forth as having direct control of the physical
well-being of his subjects, and at the same time as being able, by
special permission, to gain access to the people of God: "For as much
then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, He (Christ) also
Himself likewise took part of the same; that through death He might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil" (Heb. 2:
14). "How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with
power: who went about doing good, and healing all them that were
oppressed of the devil; for God was with him" (Acts 10:38). "And ought
not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, lo,
these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day?" (Lu.
13: 16). "And Satan answered the Lord, and said, Doth Job fear God for
naught? Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and
about all that he hath on every side? Thou hast blessed the work of his
hands, and his substance is increased in the land. But put forth thine
hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he will curse thee to thy
face. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, all that he hath is in thy
power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand" (Job. 1:9-12).
"Simon, Simon, behold, Satan asked to have you, that he might sift you
as wheat: but I have made supplication for thee, that thy faith fail
not; and do thou, when once thou hast turned again, establish thy
brethren" (Lu. 22:31, 32 R.V.). "And lest I should be exalted above
measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me
a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should
be exalted above measure" (II Cor. 12:7).

By these passages, the emphasis of Scripture on the power and authority
of Satan in this age may be seen. And though the exact limits of his
power under the restraining hand of God are not revealed, it would be
unreasonable to deny that he is the god of this age, the head of the
great world system; and, though all unknown to them, the director of the
affairs of unregenerate men.

Fourth, The works of the Satanic order are clearly outlined in several
descriptive passages which also present that which is highest in ideal,
and deepest in motive in the Satan energized mass of humanity. One
passage, alone, contains the entire revelation: "For all that is in the
world (_Satanic system_), the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world
(Satanic system)" (I Jno. 2:16). The satisfaction of these same cravings
was the temptation placed before Eve in the Garden: "And when the woman
saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the
eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit
thereof, and did give also unto her husband with her; and he did eat"
(Gen. 3:6). The real nature of these cravings is easily recognized as
wholly self-centered and without thought of God or of any true
character.

All "wars and fightings" among men are only a natural result of the evil
qualities of this great federation. Jesus said to Pilate: "My kingdom is
not of this world (_Satanic system_): if my kingdom were of this world
(_Satanic system_), then would my servants fight, that I should not be
delivered unto the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence" (Jno.
18:36). It is a noticeable fact that the governments of the world depend
upon physical power and a display of armament to maintain their position
and authority, and the superior law of love does not seem to be adapted
to, or understood by, the elements that make up the Satanic order.

Fifth, All earthly property is of the Satanic order, which property the
believer may use, but must not abuse: "But whoso hath this world's good
(Satanic system), and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his
bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?" (I
Jno. 3:17). "And the cares of this age, and the deceitfulness of riches,
and the lust of other things entering in, choke the word, and it
becometh unfruitful" (Mark 4:19). "But this I say, brethren, the time is
short: it remaineth, that both they that have wives be as though they
had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and those that buy, as though they
possessed not; and they that use this world (_Satanic system_), as not
abusing it" (I Cor. 7:29-31).

Sixth, The same world that crucified the Christ will also hate the saved
one in whom He dwells: "Marvel not, my brethren, if the world (_Satanic
system_) hate you" (I Jno. 3:13).

Seventh, The impotency and limitations of the world order are most
evident. Its leader, though mighty, is inferior to Christ: "Ye are of
God, little children, and have overcome them: because greater is he that
is in you, than he that is in the world (_Satanic system_)" (I Jno.
4:4). Its knowledge and understanding are limited: "Behold what manner
of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called
children of God; and such we are. For this cause the world (_Satanic
system_) knoweth us not, because it knew him not" (I Jno. 3:1 R.V.).
"Now the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for
they are foolishness unto him; and he cannot know them, because they are
spiritually judged. But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, and He
Himself is judged of no man" (I Cor. 2:14, 15, R.V.).

"There is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after
God" (Rom. 3:11). "And even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled in
them that perish: in whom the god of this age hath blinded the minds of
the unbelieving, that the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ,
who is the image of God, should not dawn upon them" (II Cor. 4:3, 4,
R.V.). "They are of this world (_Satanic system_): therefore speak they
as of the world, and the world (_Satanic system_) heareth them" (I Jno.
4:5, R.V.). All the sorrow of this order is without hope: "For godly
sorrow worketh repentance unto salvation, a repentance which bringeth no
regret: But the sorrow of the world (_Satanic system_) worketh death"
(II Cor. 7:10, R.V.). And, finally, the whole order is temporal and
passing: "But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in
the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth also and the works
that are therein shall be burned up" (II Pet. 3:10). "And the world
(_Satanic system_) passeth away and the lust thereof: but he that doeth
the will of God abideth forever" (I Jno. 2:17).




Chapter V.

The Satanic Host.


Christ inferred, in one of His controversies with the Pharisees (Matt.
12:22-30), that Satan is a King; and as such is in authority over a
kingdom. This particular discussion was in regard to the fact that
Christ had healed one "possessed with a demon, blind and dumb." The
Pharisees claimed that the demon had been cast out by Beelzebub the
prince of demons, or the one whom Jesus, later in the narrative, calls
Satan. The passage is as follows: "Then was brought unto Him one
possessed with a devil, blind, and dumb; and He healed him, insomuch
that the blind and dumb both spake and saw. And all the people were
amazed, and said, Is not this the son of David? But when the Pharisees
heard it, they said, This fellow doth not cast out devils, but by
Beelzebub the prince of the devils. And Jesus knew their thoughts, and
said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to
desolation; and every city or house divided against itself shall not
stand: and if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how
shall then his kingdom stand? And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by
whom do your children cast them out? therefore they shall be your
judges. But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom
of God has come unto you. Or else how can one enter into a strong man's
house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and
then he will spoil his house. He that is not with me is against me; and
he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad."

By this Scripture it may be seen that the kingdom of Satan is a host of
bodiless spirits. Although their origin cannot be definitely traced, it
is probable that they were created as subjects of Satan in the primal
glory, as he, also, was created as their prince and king. Satan, being
in authority over these beings, doubtless drew them after him in his
sinful attempt to thrust himself into the place of God.

It would seem that Satan is in authority over two distinct orders of
beings--the Satanic order of the earth, and the Satanic host of the air.
It is clear that he secured the scepter of government in the earth from
Adam, by right of conquest: while his authority over the Satanic host
is, undoubtedly, that which he has been permitted to retain from his
creation. If Satan has thus kept his authority over these spirits from
the beginning, it follows that they are in full sympathy with him and
render him willing service. The following Scriptures emphasize the
authority of Satan over these beings: "And if Satan cast out Satan, how
then shall his kingdom stand?" (Matt. 12:26). "Then shall he say also
unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels" (Matt. 25:41).

The reality and personality of this host of evil spirits is taught in
Scripture; and a careful study of the numerous passages in which they
are mentioned will reveal how God has provided complete instruction in
His Word concerning this theme on which so much of the believer's
welfare depends.

These spirits are usually referred to in both the Authorized and Revised
Versions of the New Testament as "devils," but the word might better
have been translated "demons."

In considering the service these beings render to Satan, it is important
to distinguish between demon possession or control, and demon influence.
In the one case the body is entered and a dominating control is gained:
while in the other case a warfare from without is carried on by
suggestion, temptation, and influence.

Investigation of the Scriptures in regard to demon possession reveals:

First: That this host is made up of bodiless spirits only. The following
Scripture verifies this statement: "When the unclean spirit is gone out
of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none.
Then he saith, I will return into my house from whence I came out; and
when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished. Then goeth
he, and tak'eth with himself seven other spirits more wicked than
himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last state of that
man is worse than the first" (Matt. 12:43-45). "And all the devils
besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may enter into
them" (Mark 5:12).

Second: They are, however, not only seeking to enter the bodies of
either mortals or beasts (for their power seems to be in some measure
dependent upon such embodiment); but they are constantly seen to be
thus embodied, according to the New Testament. A few of these passages
are given here: "When the even was come, they brought unto him many that
were possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word,
and healed all that were sick" (Matt. 8:16). "As they went out, behold,
they brought to him a dumb man possessed with a devil. And when the
devil was cast out, the dumb spake" (Matt. 9:32, 33). "And the people
with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spake, hearing
and seeing the miracles which he did. For unclean spirits, crying with
loud voice, came out of many that were possessed with them: and many
taken with palsies, and that were lame, were healed" (Acts 8:6,7). "And
it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel possessed with a
spirit of divination met us, which brought her masters much gain by
soothsaying" (Acts 16:16). "And they came over unto the other side of
the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes. And when he was come out of
the ship, immediately there met him out of the tombs, a man with an
unclean spirit, who had his dwelling among the tombs; and no man could
bind him, no, not with chains: because that he had been often bound with
fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and
the fetters broken in pieces: neither could any man tame him. And
always, night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the tombs,
crying, and cutting himself with stones. But when he saw Jesus afar off,
he ran and worshipped him, and cried with a loud voice, and said, What
have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I adjure
thee by God, that thou torment me not. For he said unto him, Come out
of the man, thou unclean spirit. And he asked him, What is thy name? And
he answered, saying, My name is Legion: for we are many. And he besought
him much that he would not send them away out of the country. Now there
was nigh unto the mountains a great herd of swine feeding. And all the
devils besought him, saying, send us into the swine, that we may enter
into them. And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And the unclean spirits
went out, and entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently down a
steep place into the sea, (they were about two thousand;) and were
choked in the sea" (Mark 5:1-13).

Third: They are wicked, unclean, and vicious. Many passages might be
quoted in proof of this statement: "And when he was come to the other
side of the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with
devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might
pass by that way" (Matt. 8:28). "And when he had called unto him his
twelve disciples, he gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast
them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease"
(Matt. 10:1). "There met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean
spirit, who had his dwelling among the tombs; and no man could bind him,
no, not with chains: because that he had been often bound with fetters
and chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the
fetters broken in pieces: neither could any man tame him. And always,
night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and
cutting himself with stones" (Mark 5:2-5). "And they brought him unto
him: and when he saw him, straightway the spirit tare him; and he fell
on the ground, and wallowed foaming" (Mark 9:20).

It might be added that there seem to be degrees of wickedness
represented by these spirits: for it is stated in Matt. 12:43-45 that
the demon, returning to his house, "taketh with himself seven other
spirits more wicked than himself."

The question is often raised whether demon possession obtains at the
present time. Although the authentic records of such control are almost
wholly limited to the three years of the public ministry of Jesus, it is
incredible that demon possession did not exist before that time, or has
not existed since. In this connection it should be remembered that these
beings are not only intelligent themselves, but that they are directly
governed and ordered by Satan, whose wisdom and cunning are so clearly
set forth in the Scriptures. It is reasonable to conclude that they,
like their monarch, are adapting the manner of their activity to the
enlightenment of the age and locality. It is evident that they are not
now less inclined than before to enter and dominate a body. Demon
possession in the present time is probably often unsuspected because of
the unrecognized fact that demons are capable of inspiring a moral and
exemplary life, as well as of appearing as the dominating spirit of a
spiritist medium, or through the grosser manifestations that are
recorded by missionaries from heathen lands. These demons, too, like
their king, will appear as "angels of light" as well as "roaring lions,"
when by the former impersonation they can more perfectly further the
stupendous undertakings of Satan in his warfare against the work of God.

Demon influence, like the activity of Satan, is prompted by two motives:
both to hinder the purpose of God for humanity, and to extend the
authority of Satan. They, therefore, at the command of their king,
willingly co-operate in all his God-dishonoring undertakings. Their
influence is exercised both to mislead the unsaved and to wage an
unceasing warfare against the believer (Eph. 6:12).

Their motive is suggested in what is revealed by their knowledge of the
authority and deity of Christ, as well as by what they know of their
eternal doom. The following passages are important in this connection:
"And behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee,
Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the
time?" (Matt. 8:29). "And there was in their synagogue a man with an
unclean spirit; and he cried out, saying, Let us alone; what have we to
do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I
know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God. And Jesus rebuked him,
saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him" (Mark 1:23-25). "And the
evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who
are ye?" (Acts 19:15). "Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest
well: the devils also believe, and tremble" (Jas. 2:19).

Of the methods of demons in the latter days of the age, the Scriptures
bear special testimony. They will cover their lies with the empty form
of religion, and by every means make them to appear as the truth, that
they may draw both the saved and the unsaved from their hope in Christ:
"Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of
devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with
a hot iron" (I Tim. 4: 1, 2). A departure from the true faith is thus
predicted to be the evidence of the influence of demons in the last
days. This is none other than the great apostasy that must precede the
"Day of the Lord" according to II Thes. 2:2, 3.

The believer's security in this unceasing warfare is treated at length
in another chapter. It may be noted here, however, that the
God-appointed means for this victory are prayer and bodily control,
"Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting" (Matt.
17:21); and in the appropriation of the Person of Christ as the
believer's sufficiency, as He is set forth in His saving power by the
various parts of the "whole armour" of Eph. 6:13-18.

Satan, though proposing to supersede the Almighty, is not Omnipotent:
but his power, and the extent of his activity are immeasurably increased
by the co-operation of his host of demons. Satan is not Omniscient: yet
his knowledge is greatly extended by the combined wisdom and observation
of his sympathetic subjects. Satan is not Omnipresent: but he is able to
keep up an unceasing activity in every locality by the loyal obedience
of the Satanic host, who are so numerous as to be called "Legion."




Chapter VI.

Satan's Motive.


According to Scripture, the supreme motive of Satan is his purpose to
become like the Most High and, though that purpose was formed even
before the age of man, it has been his constant actuating motive from
that time until now. It is also the teaching of Scripture that this
present period of time is that in which Satan is in especial authority;
he being permitted the exercise of his own power in order that he, and
all his followers, may make their own final demonstration to the whole
universe of the utter folly of their claims and of their abject
helplessness when wholly independent of their Creator. This is
definitely predicted in II Tim. 3:9 as the final outcome of the
atttitude of the world in its independence toward God: "They shall
proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest to all men."

It has also been stated that the unsurpassed tribulation only awaits the
withdrawal of the restraining hand of God, for all the required elements
for such a condition are latent in the unregenerate heart (Rom. 3:9-18).
In this terrible period of tribulation the greatest power of Satan will
be exercised, and the wickedness of man will be revealed in his attempt
to live in whole separation from God.

Even fallen humanity would not, at first, acknowledge Satan as its
object of worship and federal head; and such a condition of society
wherein Satan will be received as supreme (as he will be in the person
of the first Beast of Rev. 13), must, therefore, be developed by
generations of increasing irreverence and lawlessness toward God. Thus
it has been necessary for Satan to conceal his person and projects from
the very people over whom he is in authority and in whom he is the
energizing power. For this reason this class of humanity believes least
in his reality, and ignorantly rejects its real leader as a mystical
person. When he is worshipped it is through some idol as a medium, or
through his own impersonation of Jehovah; and when he rules it is by
what seems to be the voice of a King or the voice of the people.
However, the appalling irreverence of the world to-day is the sure
preparation of the forthcoming direct manifestation of Satan, as
predicted in Dan. 11, II Thes. 2 and Rev. 13.

Satan's policy of deception is described as extending to all the
nations, and to the whole world: "Even him, whose coming is after the
working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with
all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they
receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved" (II Thes.
2:9, 10). "And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, which is
the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world" (Rev. 12:9). "And
he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and
Satan, and bound him a thousand years, and cast him into the bottomless
pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive
the nations no more till the thousand years should be fulfilled: and
after that he must be loosed a little season" (Rev. 20:2, 3). "And when
the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison,
and shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters
of the earth" (Rev. 20: 7, 8). He who was the measure of perfection,
full of beauty and wisdom; he who made the earth to tremble; who shook
kingdoms; has been willing to be ridiculed by the world as a being
without reality, that he might, in the end, realize his own deepest
desire.

Again, his own subjects have strangely neglected the plain teachings of
Scripture on his real power and authority. To them he has been an
imaginary fiend, delighting only in the torment of unfortunate souls;
making his home in hell, and himself the impersonation of all that is
cruel and vile: when, on the contrary, he is real, and is the very
embodiment of the highest ideals the unregenerate world has received;
for he is the inspirer of all those ideals. With his own he is not at
enmity, and he, like the most refined of the world, is in no sympathy
with the grosser forms of their sin. He would hinder those
manifestations of evil if he could. And certainly he does not prompt
them; for they are the natural fruit of an unrestrained fallen nature,
according to James 1:14, 15: "But every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own lust, and enticed. Then when lust hath conceived, it
bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death."
"For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness,
deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness: all
these evil things come from within, and defile the man" (Mk. 7:21-23).
The dying drunkard, the fallen woman, and the suffering of the innocent
are the evidences of Satan's failure rather than the realization of his
purpose.

His own terrible sin before God would not be condemned in the eyes of
the world, for it is that which they most idealize and praise. In his
sin he aspired to that which is highest, and proposed to realize his
ideal by his own self-sufficiency and strength. True, he has lowered his
Creator, in his own mind, to a level where he supposes himself to be in
legitimate competition with Him, both for authority over other beings
and for their worship. Yet this unholy ambition and disregard for the
Creator is a most commendable thing according to the standards of the
Satanic order. In the language of the world, Satan is simply "self made"
and every element of his attitude toward his Creator is, as a principle
of life, both commended and practiced by the world.

Though hiding himself, Satan has had the satisfaction, under
limitations, of governing the affairs of men; and the delight, to a
large extent, of receiving their worship. The greatest care was taken in
the law governing God's ancient people that they should not offer their
sacrifices unto devils, which was the practice of surrounding nations
(Lev. 17:7; Deut. 32:17). In violation of these special laws, Rehoboam
instituted special priests for the devils (II Chron. 11:15), while the
worship of devils, according to the New Testament, is to continue
throughout the age: "But this I say, that the things which the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not
that ye should have fellowship with devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of
the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's
table and the table of devils" (I Cor. 10:20, 21). "And the rest of the
men that were not killed by these plagues yet repented not of the works
of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold,
and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither can see,
nor hear, nor walk" (Rev. 9:20).

Again: Satan's ambition is leading him to make this age of his special
opportunity as near perfect as his wisdom and power will permit. And in
this connection it may be noted that Satan's ambition was not to become
a fiend, but rather to become _like_ the Most High. He will, therefore,
strive for all that is moral and good: yet at the same time do all in
his power to draw men from their natural reverence of God, that, in due
time, they may acknowledge himself without fear. The Satanic ideal of
this age is, then, an improved social order, a moral and cultured
people, who are devout worshippers of himself, though for the present
they may imagine they are worshipping Jehovah through their empty
religious forms and ceremonies, while they are really in a state of
God-dishonoring unbelief, and all their thoughts are energized by Satan
alone. The Satanic message for this age will be reformation and
self-development, while the message of God is regeneration by the power
of the Spirit.

Satan, in his imitation of the Most High, is also working toward a
universal kingdom of morality and peace upon earth, which will be
temporarily realized under the reign of the Beast (Rev. 13). The
difference between Satan's ideal and the purpose of God, apart from the
utter folly of the one and the glorious certainty of the other, is of
both method and time. According to the Satanic program, the present
order of society, with himself on the throne, is to be developed into an
ideal brotherhood, in which all men will practice that which is moral
and good. According to the program of God, this is an evil age of
darkness and pollution, in which the folly of Satan and man is to be
proven, and out of which He is to gather the heavenly people for His own
name. The kingdom of righteousness is then to follow, being ushered in
by Christ-enthroning and Satan-dethroning events. There will then be a
perfect humanity and social order for "all shall know the Lord from the
least unto the greatest" and "righteousness and peace shall cover the
earth as the waters cover the face of the deep."

The master passion of Satan leads him, not only to strive for the
success of his own projects, but also to wage an unceasing warfare
against Jehovah. These two lines of activity are inseparable; for he
cannot establish and develop his own kingdom, and, at the same time,
permit his subjects to be translated out of his kingdom into another,
especially when they remain in the midst as a living power and testimony
against him. Nor can he reasonably allow the accomplishment of any of
the projects of God; for it is predicted that at the completion of these
his own doom will be at hand. The present time is, therefore, to Satan,
the struggle for his own existence, as well as the realization of all
that has been his ambition in the ages past. The warfare is no mere
passing amusement for him, for he, in desperation, is facing a terrible
and awful judgment if he cannot succeed in his purpose.

The spectacle now presented to all enlightened beings of the universe,
is that of a mighty celestial being, the god of the earth, who is by
creation the full measure of perfection, both in wisdom and beauty,
making his last and most desperate warfare, both to realize his own
ambition and to thwart every movement of the Most High; knowing that in
failure there is no ground for mercy, but only the terrible destruction
that has been so long predicted. He knew when he formed this
God-dishonoring purpose that it must either wholly succeed or he himself
fall into terrible judgment. On the other side of the conflict there is
perfect calmness and certainty as to the end, for the judgment and
sentence are past; yet every true believer is implored to be instant in
season and out of season in the present projects of grace, that the
sufferings and separations of earth may be cut short in righteousness.

Well may believers study their own motives in service in view of these
vastly differing programs; and question whether there is in them a
humble willingness to co-operate in the present purpose of God in
preparing the Bride for the returning King: or whether they have
carelessly fallen in with the Satanic ideal, which rejects the coming
Kingdom of Christ by an unholy attempt to establish the present kingdom
of Satan.

The program of Satan, which the world calls "optimistic" rests on the
Satanic purpose of a reformed society: the program of God, which is
called "pessimistic" in that it discredits this age, rests upon the
infinite wisdom, love and power of God; and is so certain and near that
the believer is taught to watch, wait, and be ready for the first Divine
movement toward this glorious end.




Chapter VII.

Satan's Methods.


The two great activities of Satan, already mentioned, are referred to in
II Thes. 2:4 in connection with the Man of sin, who will be Satan's last
and greatest manifestation. This being is spoken of as he "who
_opposeth_ and _exalteth_ himself above all that is called God, or that
is worshipped." These two activities are inseparable in that, while
Satan is seeking to exalt himself above all that is called God or that
is worshipped, he can keep his subjects or prolong his own existence
only by an unceasing warfare in which he opposes himself against God.
Whether Satan now believes that he may yet succeed in spite of the
decree of the Cross and the evident superior power of God, is not
revealed.

It is still further revealed that the enmity of Satan is not only toward
the person of God, from whom he has everything to fear, but also toward
every true child of God. Too much emphasis cannot be placed on this
fact. Satan has no controversy or warfare with his own unregenerate
people, but there is abundant Scripture to prove that he makes unceasing
effort to mar the life and service of believers. The motive for this
effort is all-sufficient: they have "partaken of the Divine nature" (II
Pet. 1:4), and afford, therefore, a possible opportunity for Satan to
thrust his fiery darts at the Divine Person. Thus the believer becomes
a medium of connection between the Divine Person and the Satanic Order;
for God literally loves the unsaved through the believer (Rom. 5:5): and
on the other hand, the prince of the Satanic system, as well as many of
his subjects, is seeking an opportunity for a thrust at the person of
God. Several important passages on the latter point may here be noted:
"These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In
the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have
overcome the world" (Jno. 16:33). "Yea, and all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution" (II Tim. 3:12). "Marvel not, my
brethren, if the world hate you" (I Jno. 3:13). "Casting all your care
upon him; for he careth for you. Be sober, be vigilant; because your
adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he
may devour: whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same
afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world" (I
Pet. 5:7-9). "Finally, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might. Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles (literally, artifices) of the devil. For our wrestling
is not against flesh and blood, but again the principalities, against
the powers, against the world rulers of this darkness, against the
spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places" (Eph. 6:10-12
R.V.).

The teaching of these passages clearly indicates the Satanic enmity
toward the believer, and the believer's utter helplessness apart from
the Divine sufficiency. They also reveal a degree of enmity which would
result in the believer's life being crushed out, were it not for the
evident answer to the prayer of Jesus: "I pray not that thou shouldest
take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the
evil one" (Jno. 17:15). Certainly there is abundant reason for the
believer to expect the fiercest opposition from the Satanic host in all
his life and service; and faith alone insures his victory over the
world.

The believer is also the object of the Satanic attack because of the
great fact that unto him is committed the great ministry of
reconciliation; that by his testimony both in life and word, and by his
prayers, the facts of redemption may be given to the world; and if Satan
can but cripple the believer's service, he accomplishes much in
resisting the present purpose of God. No other explanation is adequate
for the dark ages of Church history, the appalling failure of the Church
in world-wide evangelism, or her present sectarian divisions and selfish
indifference.

This blighting Satanic opposition can be detected in every effort for
the salvation of the lost. It may be seen in the fact that no personal
appeal is ever made to the vast majority even in this favored land; or,
when an appeal is made, it is easily distracted or diverted into the
discussion of unimportant themes. The faithful pastor or evangelist is
most sorely assailed, every device of Satan being used to distort the
one all-important message of Grace into something that is not vital. The
evangelist's call for decisions is often cumbered with that which is
misleading or is a positive misstatement of the terms of Salvation; thus
the appeal is lost and the whole effort fails. The action of Satan may
also be detected in that a humble messenger who is loyal to Christ and
His Salvation by grace alone, will be almost unheeded at the present
time: while the vast throng will be found supporting that which is
religious only in its externals, but which is, in reality, a gospel of
morality and subtle denial of the redemption that is in Christ.

Again, the opposing power of Satan may be seen in the matter of
Christian giving. Millions are given without solicitation for education,
culture, and humanity's physical comfort, but real world-wide
evangelization must ever drag on with its shameful limitations and
debts. This warfare of Satan is even more noticeable in the believer's
prayer life; this being his place of greatest usefulness and power, is
subject to the greatest conflict. In this connection it may be stated
safely that there is comparatively no prevailing prayer to-day; yet the
way is open and the promises are sure. Then, also, if the believer
cannot be beguiled into indifference or a denial of Christ, he is
tempted to place an undue emphasis upon some minor truth, and, in
partial blindness, to sacrifice his whole influence for good through the
apparent unbalance of his testimony.

Satan's warfare against the purpose of God is still more evident in his
direct hindering of the unsaved. Not only are they constantly blinded to
the Gospel, but, when the Spirit would draw them, their minds are often
filled with strange fears and distorted visions. Their inability to cast
themselves upon Christ is a mystery to themselves, and nothing but the
direct illuminating power of the Spirit in conviction can open their
eyes and deliver them from their gross darkness.

Satan has always adapted his methods to the times and conditions. If
attention has been gained, a complete denial of the truth has been made;
or, when some recognition of the truth is demanded, it has been granted
on the condition that that which is vital in redemption should be
omitted.

This partial recognition of the truth is required by the world to-day,
for, while the direct result of the believer's testimony to the Satanic
system has been toward the gathering out of the Bride, there has been an
indirect influence of this testimony upon the world which has led them
to see that all that is good in their own ideals has been already stated
in the Bible and exemplified in the life of Jesus, and that every
principle of humanitarian sympathy or righteous government has been
revealed in the Scriptures of truth. Thus there has grown a more or less
popular appreciation of the value of these moral precepts of Scripture
and of the example of Christ. This condition has prevailed to such a
degree that any new system or doctrine which secures a hearing to-day
must base its claim upon Scripture, and include, to some extent, the
person and teachings of Jesus. The fact that the world has thus partly
acknowledged the value of the Scriptures is taken by many to be a
glorious victory for God; while, on the contrary, it cannot be proven
that fallen humanity is any more inclined to accept God's terms of
salvation than in the generations past.

It is evident that this partial concession of the world to the testimony
of God has opened the way for counterfeit systems of truth, which,
according to prophecy, are the last and most to be dreaded methods in
the Satanic warfare. In this connection it must be conceded that Satan
has really granted nothing from his own position, even though he be
forced to acknowledge every principle of truth save that upon which
salvation depends. Rather is he advantaged by such a concession; for the
value and delusion of a counterfeit lies in its greatest likeness to the
real. By advocating much truth, in the form of a counterfeit system of
truth, Satan can satisfy all the external religious cravings of the
world, and yet accomplish his own end by withholding that on which man's
only hope depends. It is, therefore, no longer safe to blindly subscribe
to that which promises general good, simply because it is good, and is
garnished with the teachings of Scripture; for good has ceased to be all
on one side and evil all on the other. In fact, that which is evil in
purpose has gradually appropriated the good until but one issue
distinguishes them. Part-truth-ism has come into terrible and final
conflict with whole-truth-ism, and woe to the soul that does not discern
between them. The first, though externally religious, is of Satan, and
leaves its followers in the doom of everlasting banishment from the
presence of God: while the latter is of God, and "has promise for the
life that now is and that which is to come."

It is also noticeable that the term "infidel" has, within a generation,
disappeared from common usage, and that manner of open denial of the
truth has been almost wholly abandoned. Yet the real Church has by no
means lost her foes, for they are now even more numerous, subtle, and
terrible than ever before. These present enemies, however, like the
unclean birds in the mustard tree, have taken shelter under her
branches, and, like the leaven in the pure meal, they are penetrating
and appropriating her most sacred altars and institutions. These
vultures are fed by a multitude, both in the Church and out, who, in
Satanic blindness, are committed to the furtherance of any project or
the acceptance of any theory that promises good to the world or is
apparently based upon Scripture; little realizing that they are often
really supporting the enemy of God.

A counterfeit is Satan's most natural method of resisting the purpose of
God, since by it he can realize to that extent his desire to be _like_
the Most High. Every material is now at hand, as never before, for the
construction of those conditions that are predicted to appear only in
the very end of the age. In II Tim. 3:1-5 one of these predictions may
be found: "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall
come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without
natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce,
despisers of them that are good, traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of
pleasure more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof: from such turn away."

Every word of this prophecy is worthy of most careful study in the light
of the present tendency of society. The fifth verse is especially
important in connection with the subject of counterfeits to the truth:
"Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such
turn away." Here it is stated that in these last days forms of
godliness shall appear which, however, deny the power of God; and from
these leaders the believer is warned to turn away. The important element
in the true faith which is to be omitted in these "forms" is carefully
defined elsewhere in Scripture: "For I am not ashamed of the gospel of
Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek" (Rom. I:16). "But we
preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the
Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God" (I Cor. I:23,
24). Therefore, that which is omitted so carefully from these forms is
the salvation which is in Christ. This is most suggestive, for "there is
none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved,"
and it is by salvation alone that any deliverance can be had from the
power of darkness. Without this salvation Satan can still claim all his
own. It is perhaps necessary to add that, judging from all his writings,
this salvation, of which Paul confesses he was not ashamed, was no less
an undertaking than regeneration by the Spirit; and whatever other
theories may be advanced, this is the teaching of the Spirit through the
Apostle Paul.

It, therefore, follows that one feature of the last days will be a form
of godliness which carefully denies the power of God in salvation.

Again, Satan is "in the latter times" to be the promotor of a system of
truth or doctrine: "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the
latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits, and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having
their conscience seared with a hot iron;" (I Tim. 4:1, 2). These
predicted Satanic systems are here carefully described. Their offers
will be so attractive and externally so religious that into them will be
drawn some "who shall depart from the faith;" they being enticed by
seducing spirits. These attractive systems are not only from Satan, but
are themselves "lies in hypocrisy," being presented by those whose
conscience has been seared with a hot iron. No more illuminating terms
could be used than these. A lie covered by hypocrisy means, evidently,
that they are still attempting to be counted among the faithful; and the
conscience seared would indicate that they can distort the testimony of
God and carelessly point other souls to the bottomless pit, without
present remorse or regret.

The doctrine of devils is again referred to in Rev. 2:24 as "the deep
things of Satan" and this is Satan's counterfeit of "the deep things of
God" which the Spirit reveals to them that love Him (I Cor. 2:10).

Thus there is predicted for the last days of this age, both a form of
godliness which denies the power of salvation that is in Christ; and a
system known as "the deep things of Satan" or "doctrines of devils,"
which calls some adherents from the true faith and speaks lies in
hypocrisy. Can there be any doubt that these two Scriptures describe the
same thing, since they also refer to the same time? The lies of one can
be but the covered denial of salvation in the other.

Again, Satan has his assembly or congregational meeting which is his
counterfeit of the visible Church. This assembly is referred to, both
in Rev. 2:9 and 3:9, as the "synagogue of Satan;" an organized assembly
being as important for the testimony in the deep things of Satan as it
has been in the things of God.

In Matt. 13 the tares appear _among_ the wheat and their appearance is
said to be after the sowing of the wheat. So, also, the "children of the
Wicked one" appear and are often included and even organized within the
forms of the visible Church.

The assembly of Satan, calling itself a part of the visible Church, is
to have its ministers and teachers. This is stated in II Cor. II:13-15:
"For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves
into the apostles of Christ. And no marvel; for Satan himself is
transformed into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if
his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness;
whose end shall be according to their works." Here is a remarkable
revelation of the possible extent of the Satanic counterfeit: "False
apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles of
Christ" and "ministers of righteousness;" yet these are shown to be only
agents of the great deceiver, Satan, who is himself transformed into an
angel of light. It is evident that the method of this deception is to
imitate the real ministers of Christ. Certainly these false apostles
cannot so appear unless they gather into their message every available
"form of godliness" and cover their lies with the most subtle hypocrisy.
Evil will not appear on the outside of these systems; but they will be
announced as "another gospel" or as a larger understanding of the
previously accepted truth, and will be all the more attractive and
delusive since they are heralded by those who claim to be ministers of
Christ, who reflect the beauty of an "angel of light," and whose lives
are undoubtedly free from great temptation. It should be noted, however,
that these false ministers do not necessarily know the mission they
have. Being unregenerate persons of the Satanic system, and, so, blinded
to the real Gospel, they are sincere; preaching and teaching the best
things their energizing power, the angel of light, is pleased to reveal
unto them. Their gospel is one of human reason, and appeals to human
resources. There can be no appreciation of Divine revelation in them,
for they have not come to really know God or His Son, Jesus Christ. As
all this is true, how perilous is the attitude of many who follow
attractive ministers and religious guides only because they claim to be
such, and are sincere, and who are not awake to the one final test of
doctrine by which alone the whole covered system of Satanic lies can be
distinguished from the truth of God. In this connection John writes the
following warning: "If there come any unto you, and bring not this
doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed"
(II Jno. 10).

There yet remains one mighty element in the program of Satan's
counterfeits in addition to his outward forms, deep doctrines, church
and ministers,--that is, the Man of Sin, the blasphemous counterfeit of
the blessed Christ; who is yet to appear; who will be the very
incarnation of Satan; and "whose coming is after the working of Satan
with all power and signs and lying wonders and all deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish" (II Thes. 2:9, 10). As the whole
purpose of God in the ages has its consummation in the yet future coming
of Christ, so Satan, in imitation of the program of God, has appointed a
coming one (II Thes. 2:9), who will be his greatest manifestation, and
upon whom he will bestow his greatest wisdom, power and attractiveness.
The study of this mighty and imposing character can only be suggested in
the following pages.

The titles of Satan would indicate that he is attempting, also, in his
own person, to counterfeit the Persons of the blessed Trinity. He
appears as "the god of this world" in imitation of God the Father; he
appears as the "prince of the world" in imitation of God the Son; and
"the spirit that now energizeth in the children of disobedience" is his
imitation of God the Spirit, who dwells in and energizes the true
believers. Thus his desire to be like the Most High has led him to a
blasphemous attempt to imitate all the separate manifestations of the
three Persons of the Godhead. But, since redemption, which he proposes
to hinder, is the work of the second Person, God the Son, Satan more
often appears as a counterfeit of Christ, both in title and undertaking;
and this is the character in which he makes his last and most desperate
effort before he is banished to the pit and his final judgment is begun.




Chapter VIII.

The Man of Sin.


Reference has already been made to a period of tribulation yet to come
upon the earth. That period is referred to in Scripture by various
figures: "The great tribulation," "the time of Jacob's trouble," and "a
day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness." It
is also described as the culmination of the great apostasy which is
predicted for the end of this age and which is emphasized in the later
Epistles of the New Testament. These Epistles not only recognize a
complete apostasy yet to come in this age, but teach that the beginning
of that apostasy was apparent even then at the time when they were
written. This teaching of the apostles finds its natural culmination in
the last book of the Bible wherein the exact development of the apostasy
and the conditions to prevail in the tribulation are recorded at length.
All other references, both in the Old and the New Testaments, perfectly
agree with this extended description.

In reference to the time of the tribulation which is thus predicted,
Paul states in II Thes. 2:3 "Let no man deceive you by any means: for
that day ('the day of the Lord') shall not come, except there come a
falling away first, and that man of Sin be revealed, the son of
perdition," thus showing that the tribulation precedes the day of the
Lord; and in Rev. 19 that day is seen to be the termination of the
tribulation, which is previously described in that book. This period of
tribulation is, therefore, to come before the Kingdom Age, and to be
ended by the glorious appearing of Christ, the King.

Again, the tribulation is to come after the true Church has been
removed; for it should be remembered that the true believers are to be
saved _out_ of the "hour of trial which shall come upon the earth to try
those that dwell therein" (Rev. 3:10), (the believer, being a citizen of
the heavenlies is, therefore, not included among those who dwell in the
earth). This aspect of the Lord's return is often misunderstood. He
comes first, not to the earth, but into the air to meet His Bride and
gather her to Himself; both those that are sleeping and those that are
awake: "For the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead
in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air:
and so shall we ever be with the Lord" (I Thes. 4:16, 17). This phase of
his coming is, and has been, imminent since the promises of his return
were given; and it is for this particular preliminary event that the
Church is taught to hope and pray, for it will be the time of her
rapture and blessedness. As has been before stated, the utter
dissolution of humanity is latent in the unregenerated heart (Rom.
3:10-18), and its own tribulation only awaits this removal of all Divine
restraint. It is, therefore, both Scriptural and reasonable to conclude
that tribulation will instantly begin upon the earth after the first
aspect of the return of Christ when He comes _for_ His Church.

Thus it may be seen that this period of unsurpassed trial upon the
earth, when the blasphemous claims of Satan and man are to be proven and
God's testimony is to be vindicated, is bounded by the two events in the
Second Coming of Christ: when He comes _for_ His saints (I Thes. 4:16,
17), to gather to Himself His heavenly people, and when He comes _with_
His saints (Rev. 19:11-21) to be the complete fulfillment of all the
covenants of God with His earthly people.

The actual duration of this period is marked off in Daniel 9:24-27:
"Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to
finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness,
and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy.
Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the
commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the
Prince shall be seven weeks, and three score and two weeks: the street
shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times. And after
the three score and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for
himself: and the people of the prince that shall come shall destroy the
city and the sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and
unto the end of the war desolations are determined. And he shall confirm
the covenant with many for one week: and in the midst of the week he
shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the
overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the
consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate."

There are three distinct periods of time here indicated. First: Seventy
weeks between the time of the vision, and the age of "everlasting
righteousness" and anointing of the most Holy; or, from the time of the
vision, to the earthly kingdom of Christ, which is yet future. Second:
Sixty-nine weeks; beginning to reckon from the same time, or from the
command of the King of Babylon to restore Jerusalem, and continuing unto
the death of Christ, which is referred to as the "cutting off of the
Messiah." And lastly: One week, for the overspreading of abomination and
that which is determined to be poured upon the desolate.

History fortunately interprets the time here indicated: for, from the
command of the King to rebuild Jerusalem, to the death of Christ was 483
years, or sixty-nine weeks of seven years each. This leaves but the one
additional week of the seventy before the bringing in of the everlasting
righteousness. That one week is here described as the time of most
terrible desolation and overspreading of abomination, when the people
are under a covenant with another prince. This present age is as a
parenthesis in Jewish history and, as no account is made of it in these
reckonings, the last unfulfilled week (seven years) of the seventy,
before the kingdom is established upon the earth, must be the time
between the gathering out of the Church--an event which completes the
purpose of this parenthetical age--and the final bringing in of the
kingdom.

The last period of seven years of desolation is, however, to be
shortened, according to the words of Christ: "For then shall be great
tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this
time, no, nor ever shall be. And except those days should be shortened,
there should no flesh be saved: but for the elect's sake those days
shall be shortened" (Matt. 24:21, 22). It should be noticed that this
period cannot be confused easily with any other, for it is referred to
as the time more terrible than any other that has ever been, or ever
will be (Dan. 12:1; Joel 2:2; Matt. 24:21, 22).

Reference has been made at length to the tribulation period in order to
make clear the exact conditions in which the Man of Sin is to appear;
for this mighty world-ruler makes his advent in those days of earth's
darkness and gloom when all the light of God has been withdrawn, and the
world is left in its own helpless confusion. He appears in the
tribulation as the agent of Satan after that mighty head of the Satanic
system has been cast out of heaven into the earth (Rev. 12:7-12). The
time of the destruction of the Man of Sin is also revealed in that it is
mentioned as one of the events in the glorious coming of Christ (Dan.
2:44; 7:11-14; II Thes. 2:8; Rev. 19:20). He, therefore, appears as the
culmination of the Satanic effort, and a careful study of his person and
character will reveal the fact that he is the most stupendous work of
Satan in his enmity against God.

In connection with the time of the Man of Sin, it is also to be noted
that the believer is not directly warned against his person, but is,
rather, warned against the conditions that are to prevail as a
preparation for his coming. This is due to the fact that the true
believers are to be gathered to their Lord before that "Wicked one"
appears, and they are, therefore, only in danger of being influenced by
that which precedes and prepares for his coming. His description is set
forth at length only in such passages as deal with the whole and final
development of the age.

It should also be remembered that the description of this person, like
that of the person and work of Satan, is from the standpoint of the
holiness of God; and that which the world will hail as its glorious
ideal of perfection is, in God's sight, the personification of
rebelliousness, blasphemy, and treason.

The order of the governments and rulers of the world in this Gentile age
is revealed to Daniel in visions which are recorded and interpreted in
the book of Daniel. In these visions the Man of Sin appears as the
"little horn" of Dan. 7 and is the last and most God-dishonoring
world-ruler. He also later appears as the "desolator" of Dan. 9:27; the
"willful King" of Dan. 11:36; the "abomination of desolation" of Matt.
24:15; the "Man of Sin" of II Thes. 2:4-8; the rider on the white horse
of Rev. 6:2; and the first Beast of Rev. 13. His identity is certain,
even though he appears under various figures and titles; for he, like
Satan, is so unique in his character, time, and undertakings, that he
cannot be confused easily with any other.

In Daniel 2 the order of the kingdoms is set forth by the figure of the
great image which, at the last, is suddenly and violently shattered by
the "stone cut from the mountain without hands": which Stone is Christ,
the Corner Stone; and the Stone which the builders rejected. The feet
and toes of this image are said to be the last manifestation of human
government, and it is this part of the image that is violently shattered
by the Stone. Of this termination of earthly rule it is recorded in Dan.
2:44, 45: "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up
a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be
left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these
kingdoms, and it shall stand forever. For as much as thou sawest that
the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it brake
in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the
great God hath made known to the King what shall come to pass hereafter;
and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure."

From this chapter it may be seen that the setting up of the Messianic
Kingdom is to be both sudden and destructive to all human governments,
and that it is in no way the result of an age of development and
progressive improvement.

In Dan. 7 the Man of Sin appears, as has been stated, as the "little
horn" among ten horns; which, like the ten toes of the great image,
indicate the extreme end of human authority and power. In this vision
the latter end of the kingdoms of the earth is seen to culminate in the
one most daring ruler, the "little horn", who has "a mouth speaking
great things" and whose look is more imposing than all others; and he it
is who makes war with the saints and prevails over them until the coming
of the Ancient of days. The inspired interpretation of the vision is
given in Dan. 7:23-27: "Thus he said, the fourth beast shall be the
fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all kingdoms, and
shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in
pieces. And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten kings that shall
arise: and another shall arise after them; and he shall be diverse from
the first, and he shall subdue three kings. And he shall speak great
words against the most High, and shall wear out the saints of the most
High, and think to change times and laws: and they shall be given into
His hand until a time and times and the dividing of time. But the
judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume
and destroy it unto the end. And the kingdom and dominion, and the
greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the
people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom, and all dominion shall serve and obey Him."

In Dan. 11 the reign of the Man of Sin, the willful king, is prophesied
in detail; and the fact is stated that the reign and the blasphemous
attitude of this last great ruler are both in the purpose of God. A
portion of this remarkable passage is here given: "And the king shall do
according to his will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself
above every God, and shall speak marvellous things against the God of
gods, and shall prosper until the indignation be accomplished: for that
that is determined shall be done. Neither shall he regard the God of his
fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he shall
magnify himself above all. But in his estate shall he honor the God of
forces: and a god whom his fathers knew not shall he honor with gold,
and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things. Thus shall he
do in the most strong holds with a strange god, whom he shall
acknowledge and increase with glory: and he shall cause them to rule
over many, and shall divide the land for gain." This last verse is more
clearly translated "and he will practice in the strongholds of
fortresses with a strange god; whoso acknowledgeth him will be increased
with glory; and he shall cause them to rule over the many, and shall
divide the land to them for a reward" (Dan. 11:36-39).

Beside the collossal disregard for God, this passage presents several
important revelations. First: The expression "the God of his fathers"
would seem to indicate that the Man of Sin would come from a lineage of
Christians. Second: His disregard for the desire of women is evidence of
his hatred of the true Messiah; for this reference is probably to the
desire of every Jewish woman to be the mother of Messiah. Third: Those
who acknowledge the strange god, (Satan), whom he honors, will be
prospered, and the land will be divided unto them and he will give them
authority and glory.

In the New Testament the Man of Sin is described as "the one who comes
in his own name," whom men will receive (Jno. 5:43); "that man of sin,"
"the son of perdition" (II Thes. 2:3); "that Wicked _one_" (II Thes.
2:8); and the "beast" (Rev. 13:1), and to him Satan gives all the power
and glory he offered to Christ (Lu. 4:5, 6). Of the many references to
him, two passages deal with him at length. In the first (II Thes.
2:1-10), his coming is mentioned as directly following the removal of
God's present restraint from the earth; and in the second (Rev. 13:1-8),
as has been shown, his coming is said to directly follow the casting of
Satan from heaven into the earth (Rev. 12:7-12), and continues until the
glorious appearing of Christ, which is described in Rev. 19 and 20.

The former passage (II Thes. 2:1-10) is as follows: "Now, we beseech
you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our
gathering together unto Him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be
troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as
that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means:
for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and
that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition; who opposeth and
exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so
that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is
God. Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these
things? And, now, ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in
his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now
letteth (restrains) will let, until he be taken out of the way. And then
shall that Wicked (one) be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his
coming; even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all
power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish; because they receive not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved."

In this passage it is predicted of this mighty person that he will
assume to be very God, "sitting in the temple as God," and winning the
worship of the multitude by his miraculous power, signs, and lying
wonders; deceiving all who perish, and who would not receive the love of
the truth that they might be saved.

Still another and more striking description of this person is given in
the second passage just mentioned (Rev. 13:1-8): "And I stood upon the
sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven
heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads
the name of blasphemy. And the beast which I saw was like unto a
leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the
mouth of a lion: and the dragon (Satan) gave him his power, and his
seat, and his great authority. And I saw one of his heads as it were
wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed: and all the world
wondered after the beast. And they worshipped the dragon (Satan) which
gave power unto the beast; and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is
like unto the beast? Who is able to make war with him? And there was
given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and power
was given unto him to continue forty and two months. And he opened his
mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme His name, and his
tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. And it was given unto him to
make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him
over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations. And all that dwell upon the
earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life
of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world."

The first, and, it would seem, most important thing that is stated of
this being in this Scripture is that one of his heads was, as it were,
wounded to death, and his deadly wound was healed. Some have claimed
this to be a reference to a previous political defeat followed by
reinstatement to power. The expression is, however, most suggestive and
significant as an attempt on the part of Satan to imitate, in the Man of
Sin, that which was the supreme miracle of the Christ--His death and
resurrection. The effort is plainly effective; more so than a mere
shifting of political fortune could possibly be; for the statement
follows: "All the world wondered after the beast who had received the
deadly wound and yet lived." After they wondered, they worshipped. First
they worshipped Satan, who performed the mighty miracle; and then they
worshipped the beast, saying, "Who is like unto the beast? who is able
to make war with him?" The terrible blasphemy of the Man of Sin has been
emphasized in all Scripture references to him, and is here still more
vividly pictured.

The time he is to continue is said to be forty and two months, which
would be one-half the tribulation period; and this statement is probably
not at all figurative. By his overwhelming supernatural power and wisdom
he gains authority over every living thing in the Satanic system,
excepting those recorded in the Lamb's book of life. These are not
brought under his governing power.

The latter part of the chapter presents still another mighty person, who
is also called a "beast," but later appears as the false prophet (Rev.
19:20); and who exercises all the power of the first beast, and
receives his power from the dragon, Satan. Much is said of this second
"beast," but his mission is in no way to attract attention to himself.
He co-operates in gaining world-wide worship and authority for the first
beast, whose deadly wound was healed. The second beast seems to deal
directly with the people and by his mighty signs and miracles, as well
as by his authority, he compels loyalty to the first beast. Fire is
called down from heaven; and a dumb idol is made to speak and live. He
is able to establish a union of all people in trade, imposing a death
penalty upon them. And by all these means he furthers the interests of
the first beast. The Scripture here referred to is as follows: "And I
beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns
like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon (Satan). And he exerciseth all the
power of the first beast before him, and causeth the earth and them
which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was
healed. And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down
from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, and deceiveth them that
dwell on the earth, by the means of those miracles which he had power to
do in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on the earth,
that they should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a
sword, and did live. And he had power to give life unto the image of the
beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as
many as would not worship the image of the beast should be killed. And
he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: and that no
man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the
beast, or the number of his name. Here is wisdom. Let him that hath
understanding count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a
man; and his number is Six hundred three score and six" (Rev. 13:11-18).

There is a deep suggestion, in the person of this second beast, of a
counterfeit of the Holy Spirit of God. He who came not to speak of
Himself, but to glorify Christ and to unite all believers; leading them
in worship and praise. This second beast is probably identical with
"Anti-christ," who appears under that title only in the writings of
John, and who is there seen as the consummation of a long succession of
false religious teachers who have denied the Christ and His sacrificial
work.

When the testimony of all Scripture upon the Man of Sin is considered,
he is seen to be a person whose superhuman power is plainly ascribed to
Satan. He appears upon the scene, after the removal of the heavenly
people and during the great tribulation, as the climax of all Satanic
exaltation and opposition to God. He is the last and greatest of earthly
rulers, and, from his position of unsurpassed influence, speaks great
words and manifests great wisdom. He is externally religious, and the
promoter of great righteous projects and principles which in God's sight
are only hypocrisy and blasphemy because of the subtle Christ-denying
motive which prompts it all. His hold upon the public mind is by a
process which is natural. Great miracles are performed by himself and by
his prophet,--fire is called down from heaven; a dumb idol is made to
speak and live; and he himself has been wounded to death and yet lives.
By such supernatural works his assumption to be very God is accepted,
and he becomes the world's ideal of all that is supreme. The people are
said to first marvel and wonder; then to worship at his feet; and at
last, in mad devotion, they challenge the universe to produce his
equal--"Who is like the beast?" they cry. He has been wounded to death
and yet lives; he performs as great miracles as the world has ever seen;
his teachings are based upon Scripture; and he must, therefore, be God
manifest in the flesh. His wisdom, beauty and majesty are a seeming
warrant for every element of adoration.

Thus the Man of Sin will appear as the culmination of all the
counterfeit methods of Satan; which method had its beginnings in the
last days of the age, even before the calling away of the true Church,
the Body of Christ. The subtle doctrines of devils will be adopted as
creeds in assemblies and so called churches, and these deep things, with
the Satanic ambition for moral improvement, will be voiced by ordained
ministers who appear as apostles of Christ and ministers of
righteousness. Yet in God's sight it is all a deep lie and hypocrisy,
for they are distorting His truth and subtly denying His redemption.

All this, as has been stated, is but the Satanic preparation of humanity
that they may wholly acknowledge him as their god, and that he may
himself become like the Most High. This program is permitted in the
purpose of God, for "that that is determined shall be done" (Dan.
II:36). It will be only for a moment; for the resistless coming of the
"Ancient of Days" will unveil all this deception, banish the enemies,
and bring in His own long-predicted and glorious reign of everlasting
blessedness upon the earth.




Chapter IX.

The Fatal Omission.


To some extent it has been necessary to anticipate the subject of this
chapter in dealing with those counterfeits which are predicted for the
last days, when there will be found a "form of godliness, denying the
power thereof," and also the deep "doctrines of devils" which are "lies
in hypocrisy." This chapter deals with that which is so vital in the
true faith, and which is to be so carefully omitted in the false; that
which makes the true so potent, and without which the false becomes an
immeasurable deception. Everything depends upon this one point of
distinction; for, according to prophecy, it is the only difference that
is finally to exist between the false and the true. The issue is,
therefore, as important as life itself.

It has already been seen that the method of counterfeiting, if
successful, will require Satan to appropriate and incorporate in his
false systems every available principle of the true; for the deception
of the counterfeit depends wholly upon its likeness to the real. Herein
is revealed the reason for calling that a lie or deception which is
externally so like the truth. Certainly there could be no greater
pitfall for souls than a system which seems to be the truth of God, and
yet robs its followers of any basis for a true hope, and it will be
found that the most terrible condemnation of Scripture is uttered
against such systems and their promoters.

In seeking to discover the actual point of difference between the false
and the true, it will be well, first, to consider the present perverted
relation which exists between the Creator and the fallen human creature;
for herein is revealed the necessity of that which God proposes to
accomplish by redemption.

Two important points in Satan's doctrine were announced by him in the
Garden of Eden when he first approached the woman, and these two
declarations kave been an important part of the world's creeds
throughout the history of man. The first was a bold denial of a positive
statement of God, when Satan said: "Ye shall not surely die." Whether
Satan intended here simply to deny the truth of God's statement, or
whether he overestimated his own resources and proposed to shield them
from their God-appointed doom, is not clear. Certainly the latter view
is in keeping with Satan's original purpose, as well as with his evident
sincerity. It is quite reasonable to conclude that, if he could be so
misguided as to attempt to be like the Most High, he would willingly
have undertaken to protect man from judgment which followed as a result
of loyalty to himself. Satan is striving, at any rate, to direct the
lives of those who are under his power into a degree of self development
that will be a substitute for the revealed purpose of God for men.

The second announcement of Satan assured the woman that they would, by
this independent action, "be as God;" and this, so far from promising
death, seemed to them the immediate realization of the highest human
ideal. It was undoubtedly the original purpose of God in creation that
humanity should eventually become like Himself. By what process of
development this was to have been accomplished, had not sin entered, has
not been revealed. It is enough to know that even after man had fallen
from his high estate through sin, this Divine purpose was not abandoned,
though the problems involved were immeasurably increased: and now,
through the unsearchable riches of His grace, the realization of that
which surpasses all human dreams has been made possible, even to fallen
and polluted man.

The consummation of the transforming work of God is thus described: "For
whom He did foreknow, He did also predestinate to be conformed to the
image of His Son" (Rom. 8:29). "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and
it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when He shall
appear, we shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as He is" (I Jno.
3:2). "When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with Him in glory" (Col. 3:4). "Now unto him that is able to keep
you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of
His glory with exceeding joy" (Jude 24). "For our citizenship is in
heaven; whence also we wait for a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: who
shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be conformed
to the body of his glory, according to the working whereby He is able
even to subject all things unto Himself" (Phil. 3:20, 21 R.V.).

It is natural that Satan should suggest to humanity that which had been
the object of his own unholy ambition; and especially is it natural,
since by such a separation of humanity from its God, he could claim that
authority over them, and secure that worship from them, which he so much
craved.

There are, then, at least two distinct methods proposed for the
uplifting of humanity, and these are brought into sharp contrast; for
one is of Satan, and the other is of God. Since both these methods claim
to aim at the same end--though one ideal is not worthy to be compared
with the other--the method, alone, forms the first point for discussion.

Under the Satanic control, man has always been strangely influenced in
the matter of his relation to his Creator. He, too, has been willing to
assume a hopeless position of independence toward God; and, under that
abnormal relation, he has gone out alone to grope his way; blindly
seeking to build his own character, and by education and cultivation to
improve his natural heart, which God has pronounced humanly incurable.
He has also bent his inventive skill to the development of means by
which God-imposed labor may be avoided; and much of his selfish greed
springs from a desire to purchase a substitute who shall bear for him
the discomfort of a sweating brow. "God is not in all his thoughts;" nor
has he any disposition to claim the help of God upon the terms upon
which it is offered. The Satanic method for life prompts him to become a
god by a process of self-help and development of the finite resources.

It is very possible and natural to introduce much of religious form into
the world system of self-help; for there is a great field for religious
exercise for the one who is attempting to make himself Godlike, and
there is endless material for supplication and prayer that all available
assistance may be secured to aid one in that humanly impossible task. A
devout spirit is, therefore, a natural part of the Satanic doctrine, and
the predicted "forms of godliness" will naturally appear.

There is a vast difference between an individual supplicating God to
save him: and one supplicating God to help him save himself. The latter
is a natural part of the Satanic plan and has no promise of Divine favor
upon it. All such religious exercise, though full of outward forms and
deep sincerity, leaves its moral aspirants doomed, alike with the most
degraded, to as everlasting separation and banishment from the presence
of God: "which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and
humility, and severity to the body; but are not of any value against the
indulgence of the flesh" (Col. 2:23 R.V.). Such prayer and religious
practice do not really place the saving work in the hands of God, but
mockingly ask Him to give His sanction and assistance to that which
wholly dishonors and really disregards Him, and which is also both
unreasonable and impossible.

Though the process by which unfallen man would have reached a higher
development has not been revealed, it is certain that he would have been
then, as now, wholly dependent upon the Creator. Man's present
independence toward God is the blindest delusion of the fallen nature;
for complete independence cannot even be assumed in the least of all
temporal things: how much less is it possible in that which is
spiritual!

Again, the self-saving principle is utter folly, since God must demand
a quality which no human can present. God's requirement is not
unreasonable, however, for He also proposes to bestow, in grace, all He
ever demands. The absolute holiness of God demands no less than holiness
in all who are acceptable to Him; yet He has never mocked man by asking
him to make himself acceptable, or even to attempt to do it by Divine
help. True salvation is wholly a work of God. It is said to be both a
finished work and a gift, and, therefore, it lays no obligation upon the
saved one to complete it himself, or to make after payments of service
for it; though the saved one is called upon to serve from another and
more glorious motive.

The Divine terms of obtainment into Godlikeness are clearly stated in
the Scriptures; but the hopeless estimate God has placed upon human
nature at its best, and the logical necessity that man shall receive, as
a gift, all that he has, and be forever a debtor to the Divine
giver,--these things have always been rejected by self-sufficient and
Satan-inspired humanity. These terms are the only possible or reasonable
relations that could rightfully exist between fallen humanity and its
Creator. Here Satan has blinded the minds of the lost lest they should
believe, and he has made that which is reasonable and natural seem to be
unreasonable and unnatural. They are unable to abandon their
Satan-inspired sense of self-sufficiency and independence of God and
receive from Him, as a gift, every possession commendable in His sight.

The controversy between Satan-ruled man and God is one of method;
whether it shall be one of self-righteousness and character building:
or one of bestowed righteousness and character by the fruit of the
Spirit. Will man try to save himself: or humbly submit to being saved by
Another? Will he try to conform himself to what little he knows to be
good and true: or will he be transformed by the power of God into that
which is no less than the image of Christ? Will he present the sacrifice
of a sincere effort to be moral and religious: or accept the
God-provided sacrifice for all sin, in the shed blood of Christ? Will he
try to establish himself before God on the ground of his own works: or
rest in the finished work of Christ for him? Will he try to improve his
fallen nature: or partake of the Divine nature and become a Son of God
by the power of God, through faith in Christ Jesus?

One method, it may be seen, depends wholly upon self for its
realization; promises glory to man alone; and has its origin at that
unknown time when Satan proposed in his heart to become like the Most
High. The other method is dependent upon God alone, and, therefore,
demands an attitude of faith toward him for its realization. It issues
in glory to the Creator, Who alone is worthy to be praised. The latter,
in contrast with Satan's method, had its origin in the purpose of God,
which He purposed before the foundation of the world. Therein,
transcendent blessings are offered; stores of grace are unfolded; and
the omnipotent power of God is seen working for the transformation of
His human creatures. These two methods are confused only because they
seem to aim at the same general result. In reality their results, like
their methods, are not only incomparable, but they are as far removed
from each other as God's ways are higher than man's ways.

The revelation of God in regard to salvation might have been limited to
the fact that He, rather than man, was to accomplish the work; and while
much that is involved in the mighty undertaking of redemption has not
been, and probably cannot be, reduced to the level of human
understanding, He saw fit to reveal much that was necessary, on both the
Godward and the manward side, in providing this way of salvation. No
human conception of the atonement is complete, yet, as the
all-sufficient sacrificial death of Christ is clearly stated in
Scripture, its value, though unanalyzed, may be appropriated; for man is
not saved by what he comprehends or understands, but his salvation is
made possible by his attitude of willingness and expectation toward the
transforming power of God.

In determining the exact point of the truth that is to be omitted from
the Satanic counterfeit, it is important to distinguish between the
_Person_ and _work_ of Christ. In the one is included His teachings and
example, both in His life and death: in the other is included His
substitutionary, sacrificial, and atoning death for the sin of the
world. There is no controversy as to the value of the teachings and
example of Jesus; but the wisdom of this world is displayed in
ever-increasing antagonism against the blood of the Cross. This enmity
has never been founded on the Word of God, for Scripture does not deny
itself. The opposition appeals to pride and human reason, and dares to
challenge the plain statements of Scripture on this particular point.
Very much is thus omitted; for all the meaning of sacrifice in the Old
Testament and all the promises of redemption in the New Testament, are
inseparably related to the blood of the Cross. It may be to the Jew a
stumbling block, and to the Greek foolishness; yet to those who are
called, both Jews and Greeks, "it is the power of God and the wisdom of
God."

In Ephesians, the eternal purpose of God is said to be the complete
perfection of souls: "According as He hath chosen us in Him before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before
Him in love" (1:4). And that transformation is also said to be by the
blood of Christ: "In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His grace" (1:7). In
like manner the object of this transformation is said to be that the
Church may be the present and eternal manifestation of the wisdom, love
and power of God: "To the intent that now unto the principalities and
powers in heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold
wisdom of God" (3:10). "That in the ages to come He might show the
exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness toward us through Christ
Jesus" (2:7). "And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
usward who believe, according to the working of His mighty power, which
He wrought in Christ, when He raised Him from the dead, and set Him at
His own right hand in the heavenlies" (1:19, 20).

There is also a strong contrast of figures used in the Old Testament
which accurately emphasizes the mighty power of the Creator in the
regeneration of a soul. In Psalm 8:3 the creation of the solar system
is mentioned as the work of the _fingers_ of God: "When I consider Thy
heavens, the work of Thy _fingers_, the moon and the stars, which thou
hast ordained," but in Isa. 53:1, where the substitutionary sacrifice of
Christ is referred to, it is spoken of as the effort of the Creator's
_arm_: "Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the _arm_ of the
Lord revealed?" The suggestion here given, that the creation of a
universe is the work of His fingers, and the regeneration of souls is
the work of His mighty arm, is not overdrawn; for the price of
redemption cannot be measured by corruptible things, such as gold and
silver: but is purchased at the price of the precious blood of Christ,
as of a lamb without blemish and without spot (I Pet. 1:19).

The Scriptures abound in statements that regeneration, and the whole
transforming work of redemption, are accomplished on the ground of the
sacrificial blood of the Cross; and if these statements of Scripture are
rejected, the discussion never can be one of interpretation of
Scripture, but becomes a question of the authority of the testimony of
the Bible. A few of these passages are here given: "Surely He hath borne
our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken,
smitten of God, and afflicted. But He was wounded for our
transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of
our peace was upon Him; and with His stripes we are healed. All we like
sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the
LORD hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all" (Isa. 53:4-6). "Even as
the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to
give His life a ransom for many" (Matt. 20:28). "Behold the Lamb of God,
which taketh away the sin of the world" (Jno. 1129). "Whom God hath set
forth to be a propitiation through faith in His blood" (Rom. 3:25). "But
God commendeth His love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us. Much more then, being now justified by His blood, we
shall be saved from wrath through Him" (Rom. 5:8, 9). "For He hath made
Him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the
righteousness of God in Him" (II Cor. 5:21). "Who gave himself for our
sins, that He might deliver us from this present evil world, according
to the will of God and our Father" (Gal. 1:4). "And every priest
standeth daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices,
which can never take away sins: but this man, after He had offered one
sacrifice for sins forever, sat down on the right hand of God; from
henceforth expecting till His enemies be made His footstool. For by one
offering He hath perfected forever them that are sanctified" (Heb.
10:11-14). "Who His own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree,
that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose
stripes ye were healed" (I Pet. 2:24). "For Christ also hath once
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that He might bring us to
God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit" (I
Pet. 3:18). "And He is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole world" (I Jno. 2:2).

From the foregoing passages it may be seen that, according to the
Scriptures, the stupendous transformation of regeneration is not only
the greatest Divine undertaking, but is directly accomplished by the
sacrificial death and shed blood of Christ, and is sealed in security by
the Holy Spirit of promise.

The sacrificial death of Christ presents the only gateway for fallen man
from the power and final doom of Satan to the glory and transcendent
light of God; and there is nothing strange in the Satan-inspired
"offence of the Cross" which is often garnished with culture, worldly
wisdom, and religious forms. Even in Paul's time there were those who
were enemies of the Cross of Christ: "For many walk, of whom I have told
you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of
the cross of Christ" (Phil. 3:18). These were evidently recognized
leaders in the Christian fellowship, who were undoubtedly ardent
admirers of the _Person_ of Jesus, as revealed in His earthly life and
example: yet Paul does not hesitate to mention his own tears at the
fatal omission in their preaching; for they were enemies of the _Cross_
of Christ.

Again, it is predicted in II Pet. 2:1, 2 that a fierce enmity against
the Cross should appear: "But there were false prophets also among the
people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily
shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall follow
their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil
spoken of." Here again the denial is against the purchase or redeeming
_work_ of Christ rather than His Person or character. They are offended
at the Lord who _bought_ them, though they may be devoted to the Lord
who _taught_ them. These Satanic agents are here, as before, described
as those who seem to be teachers in the true faith, yet they bring in
damnable heresies, in all covered subtlety, which crystallizes in a
denial of the redemption that is in Christ. Being only blinded
unregenerate men, they may suppose themselves to be ministers of
righteousness and apostles of Christ; their humanitarian dreams may
inspire tireless effort and zeal; their doctrine may become world-wide
in its influence; and they may drive their mighty ecclesiastical
machinery by the injunctions of Scripture: yet if the curtain could be
lifted, their "angel of light" would be found to be Satan; working
through them to resist the purpose of God; and themselves the ministers
of Satan; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared as
with a hot iron, daring in their exalted position to devitalize the
Gospel of its power unto salvation, and dragging immortal souls after
them into hell.

It is not strange that there is resentment against the mystery of the
Cross which does not exist against any other inexplicable fact in the
world. It is not strange that the ministers of Satan, appearing as the
apostles of Christ and ministers of righteousness, should fortify their
lies and hypocrisies by contending for every phase of revealed truth;
grounding their authority so positively in the Scriptures of truth: yet
subtly omitting, or violently denying, the one and only point upon which
the interests of God and Satan divide. It is not strange that there is a
wide call for a "restatement of the truth," which usually proposes to
omit the new birth and substitute self-effort to be good, and character
building, in its place. It is not strange that the wise and cultured of
this world feel their aesthetic natures shocked by the blood of the
Cross, yet entertain no sense of their own abhorrent pollution in the
sight of the infinitely holy One. It is not strange that the world
assumes to have advanced beyond that which is repeatedly said to be the
manifestation of the wisdom of God; branding as bigots, insincere, or
ignorant, all who still hold to the whole testimony of God. It is not
strange that the atonement by blood is omitted, for it is Satan's hour
and the power of darkness, and the true child of God must patiently bear
the ever-increasing reproaches of his crucified Lord, until the glory
dawns and the shadows flee away.




Chapter X

Modern Devices.


It has been the privilege and duty of the Church throughout her history
to be looking for the return of the One to whom she has been espoused.
Had her eyes never wandered from that expectant gaze, she would have
been saved much sorrow and shame at His coming, for she has lost her
Scriptural character and much of her witnessing power whenever she has
said "My Lord delayeth his coming." It is then that she has fallen to
beating the manservants and the maidservants, and has become drunken
with the wine of this world.

True devotion to Christ must naturally issue in a deep desire to be with
Him and to see Him face to face; and though it is quite possible to have
been misled or untaught in regard to the conditions of His coming, the
contemplation of such a promise from Him can but kindle a glowing hope
in a truly devoted heart. It is a direct contradiction to claim supreme
affection for Him, and yet be careless of His promised return, or wholly
contented while separated from Him. The world, that cannot comprehend
such devotion to Christ, will easily chide the believer, and denounce
him for what they now call his "other worldness" when his affections are
set on things above, "where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God,"
and when his heart rejoices in the certain hope that "when Christ, who
is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Him in
glory."

It was necessary for Satan to rob the Church, to a great extent, of her
"blessed hope" of Christ's return, before he could attract attention to
his own attempts at world improvement, and establish his own authority
as ruler over this age. Expectation along the God-appointed lines must
be abandoned, for the most part, before humanity can be federated, and
religious institutions be made to co-operate in the Satanic program.

This vital key-truth of the imminent return of Christ was, therefore,
first discredited, and then followed by an attack upon the deity of the
Son of God and His sacrificial death; which attack is ever increasing,
and must increase to the very end. The body of truth concerning the
Lord's return is so extensive that there have always been some humble
and devout souls who have dared to believe His promises, and thus the
real Church, to some extent, her watch has been keeping.

The mighty tool in Satan's hands for the destroying of the hope of
Christ's coming has been a simple one: zealous souls have been found
who, ignoring the statements of Scripture, would attempt to fix the day
of His coming. Then, as their prophecy failed, the world and many in the
Church have laughed them to scorn. Unfortunately they came to laugh also
at the very promise of God, saying, "Where is the promise of his
coming?" and in so doing they have fulfilled some of the very things
that are predicted for the end of the age: "Knowing this first, that
there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own
lusts (desires), and saying, Where is the promise of His coming? for
since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the
beginning of creation" (II Pet. 3:3, 4). Thus Satan's authority is being
established.

The exact time of Christ's return has not been revealed; nor will it be
announced by a prophet. Nevertheless, the "children of light and the
children of the day" "are not in darkness that that day should overtake
them as a thief" (I Thes. 5:4,5). It is their privilege to rejoice in
every promise of His coming, and to recognize every new indication of
His nearness, as eagerly as the betrothed awaits her beloved. The true
believer's glory, as well as his union with loved ones in Christ, is
imminent, and by faith he can look beyond the days of the earth's
greatest anguish, and, seeing the triumph of all blessedness, he can
rejoice in the hope of His Lord's coming, and be praying, "Even so,
come, Lord Jesus."

It is, therefore, impossible to know how much of time yet remains for
the gathering out of the Bride and the development of Satan's rule; yet
it is evident that within the last generation the exact fulfillment of
those things which are predicted for the last days has begun, and is
even now developing faster than the mind can comprehend.

Not all the signs of the times have a place in these pages, but only
such as are directly connected with the working of Satan.

Since the blood redemption of the Cross is the central truth and value
of the true faith, it being the "power of God unto salvation" (Rom.
1:16; I Cor. 1:23, 24), any counterfeit system of doctrine which would
omit this essential, must force some secondary truth into the place of
prominence. Any of the great Scriptural subjects which are of universal
interest to humanity, such as physical health, immortality, morality, or
religious forms, may be substituted in the false systems, for that which
is vital. And while those subjects are all found in their proper
relations and importance in the true faith, the fact that people are
universally inclined to give attention to them furnishes an opportunity
for Satan to make a strong appeal to humanity through them; using these
subjects as central truths in his false and counterfeit systems. Many
are easily led to fix their attention upon the secondary things, and to
neglect wholly the one primary thing; especially is this true since the
secondary things are tangible and seen: while the one essential thing is
spiritual and unseen; and Satan has blinded their eyes toward that which
is of eternal value.

A system of doctrine may, then, be formed which includes every truth of
Scripture save one; exalting the _Person_ of Christ, but not His atoning
_work_, and emphasizing some secondary truth as its central value. This
system will be readily accepted by blinded humanity, though the real
power of God unto salvation has been carefully withdrawn.

Naturally it would be supposed that such Satan-inspired systems would
have no value or power, since there could be no Divine favor upon them.
Such a supposition would be possible only because of the prevailing
misunderstanding as to the real power of Satan. If the description given
of him in Scripture is accepted, he will be seen to be possessed with
miraculous power; able to perform such marvels that the whole world is
led to wonder and then to worship. He is free also to bestow this
miraculous power upon others (Rev. 13:2). So it is no marvel if his
ministers, who appear as the ministers of righteousness, are able to
exert superhuman power when it is directly in the interest of the
Satanic projects.

The great power of Satan has doubtless been active along these lines
during all the ages past; for it is impossible that humanity should have
worshipped other gods blindly without some recompense, and it is Satan
himself who has been thus worshipped (Lev. 17:7; II Chron. 11:15; Rev.
9:20).

It is not final evidence, therefore, that a system of doctrine is of God
simply because there are accompanying manifestations of superhuman
power; nor is it final evidence that the Almighty has responded, simply
because any form of supplication has been answered. The Divine movements
are, of necessity, limited by the laws of His own holiness, and access
into His presence is by the blood of Jesus alone; by a new and living
Way which was consecrated for us through His flesh (Heb. 10:19, 20).
Assuming to come before God in prayer, but ignoring this truth, is but
to insult, with pollution, Him who is infinitely Holy and pure. Satan,
who is aspiring to the place of the Almighty, may answer the prayer of
his own subjects, even though that prayer is blindly addressed to the
Supreme Being. Surely the Satan-ruled world does not come before God by
the blood of Jesus.

Though false systems of doctrine have always existed, counterfeits in
hypocrisy are a distinct characteristic of the last days of the present
age. And it is a most significant fact that within the last generation
such systems have appeared and are rapidly multiplying: systems that
borrow every phase of the true faith, but one, and are conspicuous in
that they emphasize some secondary truth with what seems, at times, to
be miraculous power. Multitudes are being won to these creeds, both
because of their apparent religious aspect, and by the actual results
they accomplish.

There is probably no subject of more universal interest than that of
physical health; and but recently "Christian Science" has appeared,
which chiefly emphasizes physical health. While it gathers into itself
some elements that are foreign both to Christianity and to Science, and
appropriates much from the field of psychology, it assumes to be an
infallible interpretation of Scripture, and makes Jesus its highest
exponent and teacher. Yet it positively denies even the reality of sin
and the need of Christ's atoning sacrifice. Its followers are won and
held by these religious claims, and by the actual physical and mental
transformations that are secured. Nothing but ignorance will attempt to
deny that, to some extent, its claims are real. That it has assemblies,
ministers, and mysteries deep and profound, and that it is able to
demonstrate its claims of physical transformation, does not lift it
above the level of Satan's power. That it denies even the need of the
blood of the Cross, separates it, in spite of its claims, from the God
of the Scriptures, and brands it with every characteristic of Satan's
counterfeit.

Another subject, already mentioned, which is of common interest to
humanity, is immortality. How persistently man has sought to see beyond
the veil! And yet how little of fact has been discovered, beyond that
which it has pleased God to reveal in His Word! How strong is the desire
of the heart to follow the departed into the great unseen! And how
subtle is "Spiritism" in its election of a phase of the immortality
question as its bait to beguile sorrow-crushed souls into a disregard of
their only hope in the blood of Christ.

This system has existed from the earliest ages and has the unqualified
condemnation of Scripture; yet in the last half-century it has taken new
interest and dignity to itself under the modern title of "Psychical
Research." With boldest assumption it claims to be the only safe
exponent of truth, and to be working in the interests of science;
changing science being accepted as more trustworthy than revelation. It
offers as final evidence for its assumptions, what are represented to be
the statements of deceased people.

Less is made of the Scriptures in this system: yet here, as might be
expected, there is violent opposition to the doctrine of Regeneration.

It cannot possibly be denied that there is an intelligent response to
the human appeal from the Unseen; and messages are being received and
mysterious acts are being performed with increasing frequency. It
cannot, however, be proven that this response is from the spirit of the
person named, for a lying spirit could easily know enough of any
person's life to represent him in every detail. That the whole system
could be of Satan is evident, and since it denies man's only hope of
redemption, it is no part of the real truth of God. It, too, bears all
the marks of the workings of Satan.

Another system of thought called "New," but which is as old as human
philosophy, appropriates every phase of metaphysical belief. The central
idea of the "New Thought" is the complete development of man,--body,
soul, and spirit. Every possible human power is utilized; there is
recognition of the Creator; the Word of God is appropriated in
convenient texts; and Christ is claimed by its followers to be the
complete example and embodiment of all their ideals. Newly stated
theories of psychology are included in this system, and the whole
teaching stands as the embodiment of all the ideals of the one who first
suggested to humanity that they, by their own efforts, become as God.
The system wholly denies Scriptural regeneration, both as to its
necessity and as a fact; and is a veritable worship of self, as
predicted for the last days (II Tim. 3:2). It substitutes the
development of the will as a power for victory in the life, in place of
the God-provided victory over sin by the Spirit. Its followers seem to
be utterly blind to the plainest truths of the Scriptures, and are
marvelling at what they suppose to be a discovery; when, perchance, they
are able to comprehend some secondary truth of the Word of God. This
system, like "Christian Science," numbers its followers by the hundreds
of thousands. They support many periodicals, and their teachings are
read and accepted throughout the world.

In all these doctrines there is included much of the precious truth of
God, but this is employed only as a bait to cover the relentless hook of
Satan, by which he seeks to draw human souls away from God and into
perdition. Not one positive word is said of the future state of man, or
of his fitness to meet his God, and any belief in immortality is
borrowed from the revelation of God; for the systems themselves are
given over to distracting and diverting man from the thought of his need
of a Divinely wrought preparation for eternity. It is commonly stated by
the followers of these systems that it is of little importance what one
believes, for it is the _life_ that counts. Thus the great and necessary
fact that any true character as well as any eternal blessedness depends
upon what one believes, rather than on the life, is discredited.

These systems are mentioned only as examples of the almost innumerable
doctrines that are sweeping the world to-day. They often reappear under
new and misleading titles. The truth they acknowledge, and many forces
they employ, are God's gracious provision for His saints; yet when these
truths and forces are used alone, where the real purpose of God is
skillfully omitted, they become only the hypocrisy that covers and
garnishes a lie.

Again, many are deluded by the emphasis upon the mere outward forms of
the visible Church. When these forms are analyzed, they appear to
represent a church ministered to by a recognized ordained minister who
depends upon his own personality for his power; and who preaches ethics
and morality drawn from Scripture texts and other ethical writings.
Prayers are offered, imploring the Almighty to aid humanity in its
attempts to commend itself to Him by a more or less faithful practice of
religion. The pleasures of music as an art are provided at fabulous
cost, in place of the praise that is inspired by the Spirit of God.
Social gatherings are held, to take the place of the unity of the Spirit
and the love of the brethren. Humanitarian appeals for the betterment of
the world are made, in place of the evangelical regeneration by the
Cross; and not one reference to the real Gospel is made from one year to
the next, unless it be in a covered denial. The sleeping congregations
are seemingly satisfied with a mockery of the truth, and are content
with a doctrine that proposes to educate souls into hell, and which
encourages them to make a few efforts toward self-development while on
their certain road to perdition. It is no longer good form in society to
be without some church relations, yet the one and only true basis for
salvation may never have been comprehended or accepted by a multitude of
these members. Truly the god of this world is accomplishing his end, and
his blinded followers are coming to be numbered with the faithful. The
evil birds are flocking to the mustard tree, and the corrupting leaven
is permeating the measures of meal.

The last development of the earth history of the visible Church is
predicted to be a condition in which the Church is saying, "I am rich,
and increased in goods, and have need of nothing." The passage
continues, "and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in
the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white raiment, that thou mayest
be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and
anoint thy eyes with eye salve, that thou mayest see. As many as I love,
I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore, and repent. Behold, I stand
at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I
will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me" (Rev.
3:17-20). If Scripture language and figure mean anything, this is a
description of an unregenerate Church over which the Lord is pleading.
It is from this Church that He has withdrawn; and is seen outside,
standing and knocking. His hope is not centered upon reforming the whole
mass of professing members; for his offer is to the individual "any man"
with whom He will then have personal communion and fellowship.

Sad is the spectacle of these churches; meeting week after week to be
beguiled by the philosophy of men, and raising no voice in protest
against the denial of their only foundation as a church, and of their
only hope for time and eternity! Far more honorable were the infidels of
the past generation than these ministers. They were wholly outside the
Church. But now, behold the inconsistency! Men who are covered by the
vesture of the Church, ministering its sacraments, and supported by its
benevolence, are making an open attack upon that wisdom of God which
made Christ Jesus the only ground for all righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption. The predictions for the last days are thus not only
being fulfilled by false systems and doctrines, but they are found in
the visible Church itself. "For the time will come when they will not
endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their
ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables" (II Tim. 4:3, 4).

Great religious activities are possible without coming into
complications with saving faith. It is possible to be more concerned
over the untimely death of one hundred thousand drunkards than with the
Christ-less death of twenty million human beings; or to be wholly
concerned with the educational and physical needs of the heathen, and to
neglect their greatest need in regeneration. Thus Satan may gain his own
ends, even through some so-called missionary undertakings, for in this
manner he can beguile untaught saints to limit their work to the lines
of his highest ideals. It is possible to fight against sin and not
present the Saviour; or to urge the highest Scriptural ideals and yet
offer no reasonable way of attainment.

There is a strange fascination about these undertakings which are
humanitarian, and are religious only in form and title. And there is a
strange attraction in the leader who announces that he is not concerned
with the doctrines of Scripture, because the helping of humanity is his
one passion and care: yet all his passion is lost and his care is to no
real end unless coupled with a very positive message of a particular way
of Salvation, the true understanding of which demands a series of most
careful distinctions.

Recently the word "pragmatism" has been brought into popular use to
denote the test by which the pragmatists measure all systems, theories
and doctrines. The pragmatic inquiry when applied to any system, theory,
or doctrine may be understood to mean, "does it meet its claims in
practice?" Although much is being made of this phase of pragmatism, the
test is as old as the race, and verified by Scripture, for Jesus said,
"By their fruits ye shall know them." However, the burden of testing
claims has never before been so great, for the world was never so filled
with new and strange theories as now. And these modern systems that deny
true salvation in Christ are growing mightily under this test. They
offer comparatively little and are usually able to meet their claims.
"Christian Science" does, to some extent, change the condition of mind
and body. "Spiritism" offers a demonstration from the invisible, and the
demonstrations appear. "New Thought" proposes a development of the whole
natural man, and thrives by the practical test of "pragmatism." The same
is true of all other similar systems and doctrines, and will be true of
those that may yet appear, since it is the very program of Satan as it
is revealed in his last blasphemous counterfeit of the Son of God; for
it is written in Rev. 13:3, 4 that they first wondered at the miracles
of the Man of Sin, and then worshipped. Woe to the untaught soul who
stands wondering to-day at the marvels of this evil age, if he be
without a sense of the importance and value of the priceless blood of
the Cross! The step is not far, for such an one, to the place where he
falls in worship: worship of a being who is supposed to have forgotten
abhorrence of sin and abandoned all eternal covenants of mercy by blood
alone; a being who is supposed to be glad that the world has outgrown
the old unbearable estimates of sin and redemption, and into whose
presence the worshipper is supposed to be free to come on the ground of
his fallen human nature, or the "universal fatherhood of God and the
brotherhood of man."

Who can be the god of these systems? the energizing power in these
people? and the answerer of their prayers? Surely not the God of the
Scriptures, who cannot deny himself, and whose word cannot be made to
pass away! Revelation sets forth but one other being who is capable of
these undertakings; and it not; only assigns to this being a great and
sufficient motive for all such activity, but clearly predicts that he
will thus "oppose" and "exalt himself" in this very day and age.

Much of the secondary truth is the present inheritance of the child of
God: yet, if there is a choice to be made, the deepest wisdom will
perceive that all the combined secondary values that Satan can offer are
but for a fleeting time; and are not worthy to be compared with the
eternal riches of grace in Christ Jesus.




Chapter XI.

The Believer's Present Position.


Since the Bible contains God's message to the people of the ages, it
must be rightly divided if the body of truth concerning any particular
age or people is to be clearly understood. There are, undoubtedly, many
things in common in the various ages, and, because of that fact, the
superficial use of the Scriptures has been to treat the entire book as a
direct message to all people of all time. This method, as has been
stated, has resulted in great confusion as to the Divine program.

When that portion of Scripture which directly applies to the present age
has been discovered, that, too, must be divided; for the present time is
a period of mixture among the people of the earth--the saints of God
tenting among the citizens of the Satanic system, and having nothing in
common with them beyond the ordinary things of this earth life.

Again, that particular body of truth which applies to the child of God
in this age may be divided, and a portion be called "Positional Truth"
in that it unfolds the believer's present relation to the Godhead, the
heavenlies, and the present world; while another may be known as "Life
Truth" in that it is a particular statement of his present
responsibility in conduct and service, and also includes the provisions
of God whereby he may fully accomplish the whole will of God. A partial
study of Life Truth is reserved for the next and last chapter; while
this chapter is to be devoted to the believer's present position and
separation from the world.

The importance of Positional Truth is suggested by the fact that, in the
context of Scripture, it precedes the statement of Life Truth; forming
the basis of its appeal. As an illustration of this it may be seen that
the order of the doctrinal Epistles is first, to state a great
Positional Truth, which is then followed by an appeal for a life
consistent with the truth revealed. The first great section of the book
of Romans (Chapters 1-8), sets forth the fact of a great and full
salvation; this is followed (omitting the dispensational parenthesis of
Chapters 9-11) by the closing section (Chapters 12-16), which is a
detailed description of the life a saved person should live, and which
opens with this appeal: "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. And be not
conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your
minds, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect,
will of God." So, in the first section of the letter to the Ephesians
(Chapters 1-3), the believer's position is unfolded, and this is
followed by a section (Chapters 4-6), which is a series of injunctions
for a heavenly walk; this section opens as follows: "I therefore, the
prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation
wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with long
suffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace." No appeal for faithfulness in the
Christian life will be found to be adequate or effective that does not
follow this same order, or that is not based upon some great revealed
fact of the new life in Christ. It is probable that the present neglect
and disregard for Positional Truth has, in spite of moral exhortation,
borne its legitimate fruit in a time-serving worldly Church.

It is a beautiful example of the harmony of the Scriptures that, while
the evil of the present age is so-clearly described, the true child of
God is most carefully separated from its relationships, and is seen to
be in a position so independent of all the authority of the world, that
he can walk with the Lord in unbroken communion and fellowship, even
while surrounded by this spiritual darkness. And, though the Scriptural
statements as to the ever increasing darkness of this age be rejected,
no meaning can be given to these passages that separate the believer
from this world, without the recognition of the black background of the
failure and sinfulness of this age. It is noticeable that the modern
systems take no notice of the difference between the saved and the
unsaved, as they also make little of the future state. This is in
accordance with the fact that both of these truths are wholly dependent
upon regeneration; and that is the one truth these systems are
originated by Satan to resist.

The believer's position is set forth in at least seven positive
revelations, three of which concern his change from the darkness of
Satan to the light of God; two concern his relationship to the heavenly
sphere; and two concern his relationship to the Satanic order. A careful
study of these important passages will reveal the great reality of
Redemption.

The first Divine movement for the salvation of an individual, after the
prayer of intercession by the Spirit, is illumination by the Spirit.
This same work is also mentioned as the "convicting" or "convincing" of
the Spirit. In this part of the Divine undertaking, the blinding by
Satan is temporarily removed and the soul beholds, by Divine vision, the
Lord of glory and the way into eternal life through Him: but woe to the
soul thus favored, who repeatedly turns from that vision in rejection!
Of such it is written: "For it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and
the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them
again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God
afresh, and put him to an open shame. For the earth which drinketh in
the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them
by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessings from God: but that which
beareth thorns and briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing; whose
end is to be burned. But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of
you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak" (Heb.
6:4-9). Here there is pronounced a permanent return to the awful
blindness of Satan for the one who rejects the illumination of the
Spirit; but there is also offered an ever-widening of vision and glory
to the one who accepts the Lord as He is revealed by the Spirit, for he
then comes into possession of the "things that accompany salvation."

This illuminating work of the Spirit is mentioned by Paul in his words
to King Agrippa, wherein he describes his own commission to service. He
claimed to have been appointed by the Lord who spoke to him from the
Glory. He relates that by this commission he was sent "to open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me"
(Acts 26:18). This is the exact order of the Divine movements in
redemption; the illumination of the Spirit is placed before everything
else. There is probably no more neglected truth in modern evangelism
than this preliminary work of the Spirit: yet it is the Divine
preparation for the intelligent action of the human will; and if the
right choice is made, it unveils the eyes for all the coming ages.

This important illuminating work of the Spirit is completely described
in Jno. 16:8-11 as being a revelation of the judgment, by the Cross, of
all sin and condemnation; the vision of the glorious righteous Christ,
now in heaven; and the realization of the sin of rejecting Him. The
passage is here given: "Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is
expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And
when he is come, he will convince the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment: of sin, because they believe not on me;
of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; of
judgment, because the prince of this world is judged." The true child of
God is, then, one in whom the Spirit has wrought in lifting the blinding
by Satan and revealing to some extent, even now, the surpassing glory of
Christ. Sin, too, has become a terrible reality, and the Cross and the
precious blood have become the basis of his confidence toward his God.

Another revelation of the present position of the believer is that he
has partaken of the Divine nature through regeneration by the Spirit.
This truth is stated in many passages, a few of which are here given:
"But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons
of God, even to them that believe on his name: which were born, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God"
(Jno. I:12, 13). "Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that
which is born of the Spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee,
Ye must be born again. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou
hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and
whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit" (Jno.
3:5-8). "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have
it more abundantly" (Jno. 10:10). "For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature"
(Gal. 6:15). "Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy He saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost" (Titus 3:5). "Therefore if any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature: old things have passed away; behold, all
things have become new" (II Cor. 5:17). "Whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be
partakers of the Divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in
the world through lust" (II Pet. 1:4).

The reality of this mighty transformation is in no way evident in
present visible things, but must be accepted by faith. It is no less
than a translation from the kingdom of Satan into the kingdom of Christ,
"who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us
into the kingdom of his dear Son" (Col. 1:13). And by it one is said to
be delivered from this present evil age: "Who gave himself for our sins,
that He might deliver us from this present evil age, according to the
will of God and our Father" (Gal. 1:4), and, also, according to the
above passage, "to have escaped the corruption that is in the world"
(Satanic system).

The new life that is thus imparted is none other than the very life of
Christ: "Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his" (Rom. 8:9). "To whom God would make known what is the riches of the
glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the
hope of glory" (Col. 1:27). "I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me"
(Gal. 2:20). "Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your
own selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in
you, except ye be reprobates?" (II Cor. 13:5).

The third great fact of the believer's present position in separation
from this world is that the Holy Spirit is given unto him, at the moment
of his regeneration, to indwell him, in place of the energizing power of
Satan who "worketh" with energy in the children of disobedience: "The
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit that is
given unto us" (Rom. 5:5). "Now we have received not the spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is of God; that we might know the things
that are freely given to us of God" (I Cor. 2:12). "What? know ye not
that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye
have of God, and ye are not your own?" (I Cor. 6:19).

Another phase of the believer's position is revealed in the fact that he
is said to be a citizen of heaven; his home center or citizenship having
been moved there from the earth. His name would, therefore, appear only
among the celestial beings, in any true census of the universe. The
reality of this unseen relationship is brought out in several passages:
"For our citizenship is in heaven; from whence also we wait for a
Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall fashion anew the body of our
humiliation, that it may be conformed to the body of His glory,
according to the working whereby He is able even to subject all things
unto Himself" (Phil. 3:20 R.V.). "For ye know that if our earthly house
of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. For in this we groan,
earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from
heaven: if so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked. For we
that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: not for that we
would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed
up of life. Now He that hath wrought us for the self-same thing is God,
Who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. Therefore we are
always confident, knowing that, whilst we are at home in the body, we
are absent from the Lord: (For we walk by faith, not by sight:) we are
confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to
be present with the Lord" (II Cor. 5:1-8).

Again, as to the believer's position in that which is termed in
Ephesians "the heavenly _places_,"--though the supplying of the word
"places" is very misleading. The meaning of the word "heavenly" here is
not so much of locality as of experience: as is indicated by the use of
the same word in other passages where the believer is said to be
"heavenly" in standing and relationship (Heb. 3:1; Eph. 2:6. See also
Matt. 18:35; Jno. 3:12; I Cor. 15:48).

Dr. C. I. Scofield makes the following statement on this important phase
of the believer's position:

"The Christian is 'heavenly' by calling (Heb. 3:1), by citizenship
(Phil. 3:20), by inheritance (I Pet. 1:4) and by resurrection life (Eph.
2:6), as a member of that body of which the Head is actually in heaven.
The heavenly (or 'in heavenly _places_,') therefore, is the sphere of
the believer's present association with Christ. This is shown by the
constant context, 'in Christ Jesus.' The believer is now associated
with Christ in life (Col. 3:4; I Jno. 5:11, 12), position (Eph. 2:6),
suffering (Rom. 8:18; II Tim. 2:11, 12; Col. 1:24; Phil. 1:29); service,
(Jno. 17:18; Matt. 28:18-20), and betrothal (II Cor. 11:1-3).

"The believer is to be associated with Christ in Glory (Jno. 17:22; Rom.
8:18; Col. 3:4), inheritance (Rom. 8:17), authority (Matt. 19:28; Rev.
3:21), and marriage (Eph. 5:22, 33; Rev. 19:1-9).

"The believer's 'spiritual blessings' (Eph. 1:3), therefore, are to be
possessed or experienced only as he lives in the sphere of his joint
life, joint position, joint suffering, joint service and joint marriage
pledge with Christ. In so far as he lives as a natural man whose
interests are earthly, and avoids the path of co-service and (if need
be) co-suffering, he will know nothing experimentally of the exalted
blessings of Ephesians. 'It is sufficient that the servant be as his
Master.' Christ took account of Himself as a heavenly Being come down to
earth to do His Father's will." (Scofield Bible Correspondence Course,
Book 2; page 288.)

Thus it may be seen that the believer is not only a citizen of heaven,
but that he has also been brought into a position where many privileges
of the heavenly experience are open to him.

In like manner, the believer's position in relation to this world is not
only a separation from the world by nature and purpose; but he is also
said to be a stranger and a pilgrim among the inhabitants of this dark
age. "But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of him
who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light: which in
times past were not a people, but are now the people of God: which had
not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy. Dearly beloved, I
beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which
war against the soul; having your conversation honest among the
Gentiles" (I Pet. 2:9-12). The same expression of "strangers and
pilgrims" is used, also, in regard to the faith descendants of Abraham:
"these all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having
seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims upon the earth" (Heb.
11:13). This same wide difference between the people of this world and
the people of God is also stated in passages where the world is
understood to be the system over which Satan now rules: "He that loveth
his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world
(Satanic system) shall keep it unto life eternal" (Jno. 12:25). "Ye
adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the
world is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore who will be a friend of
the world (Satanic system) is the enemy of God" (Jas. 4:4). Love not the
world (Satanic system), neither the things that are in the world. "If any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that
is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the
world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of
God abideth forever" (I Jno. 2:15-17).

The word "lust," constantly used in description of the Satanic system,
has a much larger meaning in the Scripture than its present popular use,
where it refers only to that which is sensual. In these passages quoted,
it refers to the whole Satan-inspired ambition of humanity, and includes
their principle of self-help, and their struggle for all that, to them,
is highest and best. It is unlawful, in that it disregards the truth of
God; and it is related to that which is physical, because it magnifies
the finite being and its resources.

Two other striking passages concerning the relation of the believer to
the world are here given: "Herein is our love made perfect, that we may
have boldness in the day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in
this world (Satanic system)" (I Jno. 4:17). "As thou hast sent me into
the world (Satanic system), even so have I also sent them into the world
(Satanic system)" (Jno. 17:18).

The last revelation of the believer's position to be mentioned here, is
in regard to his service for the world. The unbounded love of God has
called him into fellowship with Christ in the great work of this age;
and in that connection he is under commission to evangelize, by a
process of witnessing, to the uttermost parts of the world. In this
undertaking he is promised the immediate presence of Christ, to whom all
power, both in heaven and in earth, has been given (Matt. 28:18-20). The
language of the inspired Book describes such witnesses as "Ambassadors
for Christ": "Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to
God" (II Cor. 5:20). And the ambassador's message is also given in the
next verse of the same passage: "For He hath made Him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in Him"
(we who knew no righteousness).

Nowhere does the saint need more direct teaching of the Spirit than in
regard to the relatioin he sustains to this world. In spite of the
similarity of his earth life to that of the world's people, he must
reckon himself to be dead in Christ and raised to newness of life.
Expecting the world to misunderstand him and even to hate him, he must
"wisely walk before them who are without." He is called upon to "use
this world but not to abuse it;" and that which is of itself pure and
good may become undesirable to him at times, because its use would
further the interests of Satan.

Some have taken the extreme position of assigning to Satan the material
universe and everything that is in the world to-day; not recognizing the
fact that no material or physical thing is evil of itself. God created
all things good. Satan has created nothing, and his present relation to
the world is only as a permitted usurper who appropriates and devastates
the things of God in the interests of his own ambition. He is the
file-leader in a great and terrible rebellion against the government of
God: but the natural universe, like all the powers of the human mind and
will, belongs primarily to God, the Creator; and by title of
inheritance, they belong also, to the child of God: "therefore let no
man glory in men. For all things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to
come; all are yours; and ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's" (I Cor.
3:21-23). Yet, since Satan is making use of many good things to cover
his evil purpose, the child of God must, for the present, discern the
hidden evil and, in loyalty to his Lord, reject everything that may
further the workings of Satan. The Scripture is very clear on this
point, and discusses one issue as an example of all similar issues. This
discussion in Scripture is of food which of itself is perfectly good,
but may be a means of great harm when associated with the purposes of
evil. The passages are as follows: "Let us not therefore judge one
another any more: but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling
block or an occasion to fall in his brother's way. I know, and am
persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of itself:
but to him that esteemeth anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou not
charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. Let not
then your good be evil spoken of: for the kingdom of God is not meat and
drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. For he
that in these things serveth Christ is acceptable to God, and approved
of men. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace,
and things wherewith one may edify another. For meat destroy not the
work of God. All things indeed are pure; but it is evil for that man who
eateth with offence. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine,
nor anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made
weak" (Rom. 14: 13-21). "What say I then? that the idol is anything, or
that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is anything? But I say, that
the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils and
not to God: and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils.
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot be
partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table of devils. Do we provoke
the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than He? All things are lawful for
me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but
all things edify not. Let no man seek his own, but every man another's
wealth. Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question
for conscience sake: for the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness
thereof. If any of them that believe not bid you to a feast, and ye be
disposed to go; whatsover is set before you, eat, asking no question for
conscience sake. But if any man say unto you, This is offered in
sacrifice unto idols, eat not for his sake that shewed it, and for
conscience sake: for the earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof:
conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the other: for why is my
liberty judged of another man's conscience? For if I by grace be a
partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks?
Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God. Give none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the
Gentiles, nor to the church of God: even as I please all men in all
things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they
may be saved" (I Cor. 10:19-33).

The question becomes a practical one, in view of the present progress
in discovery, science, and psychology. A theory must not be rejected
because it is new or mysterious; for the marvelous inventions of the age
are often as useful in spreading the Gospel as in furthering the
interests of Satan. The newly acquired knowledge of the universe may be
as valuable to the progress of good as to the advancement of evil.

There can be but one final test as to what shall be accepted and what
shall be rejected, and that must be made by the individual alone before
God (Rom. 14:22). In connection with any such question we may ask, "Is
the real work of redemption hindered, or its true basis rejected? Is
this a direct denial of the truth, by which souls will be hindered, or
is it a counterfeit which may decoy them away from their only hope in
the priceless blood of the Cross?" Beyond this, a child of God may
safely be "all things to all men that he may save some."

The Christian can see more of beauty in the world, make larger use of
its learning, and more fully appreciate its good, than can the children
of this age: yet he must now, above all things else, be content with his
limited commission, and be jealous of the interests of his Lord and
King. Much of his present perplexity would be relieved if he could but
realize that he is temporarily tenting where an enemy rules, and where
he is the object of that enemy's fiery darts, yet hedged about by the
omnipotence of God; called to bear the one message of redemption by the
Cross, in the capacity and hidden dignity of an ambassador from the
throne of the Most High; even now possessing a glory which shall soon
be unveiled in the presence of his Lord; waiting that morning when his
Lord shall come again and receive him unto Himself.




Chapter XII.

The Believer's Present Victory.


An exalted position is usually accompanied with great responsibility.
This is certainly true, according to Scripture, in the case of the
believer in his heavenly position. For when he is seen as a citizen of
heaven, and a partaker of those associations, he is also required, both
by Scripture and by reason, to "walk worthy of the calling wherewith he
is called." The statement of these heavenly demands upon the child of
God forms a distinct body of truth, and there are at least three such
bodies of truth in Scripture, each appearing as a rule of conduct for
some special people in some particular time. The Mosaic Law was given
primarily to God's ancient people through Moses; but it has a message
still, as it reflects the holiness of God and prepares for the salvation
which is in Christ. So the "Sermon on the Mount," with the injunctions
of John Baptist, and the early teachings of Christ were given with the
coming kingdom age in view and, therefore, form an important revelation
in regard to that time when "all shall know the Lord from the least unto
the greatest." Though there are some common principles running through
all these separate teachings, that Scripture which applies directly to
the people of this parenthetical age of the Church will be found only in
portions of the Gospels and in the Epistles of the New Testament.

No appreciation of the provisions of God for a victorious life can be
had until the demands which the believer's position imposes are
realized. These demands are in no way the standards of the world, for
the believer is not only a citizen of heaven in position, but is called
upon even now to fulfil all the standards of that sphere. As an
illustration of this fact, a very few of these heavenly ideals and
injunctions are given here: "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service" (Rom. 12:1).
"Rejoice evermore. Pray without ceasing. In everything give thanks: for
this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you." "Abstain from
all appearance of evil" (I Thes. 5:16-18, 22). "But the fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance: against such there is no law" (Gal. 5:22, 23). "I
therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of
the vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness,
with long suffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavoring to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace" (Eph. 4:1-3). "And grieve
not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption" (Eph. 4:30). "Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding
what the will of the Lord is. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is
excess; but be filled with the Spirit; speaking to yourselves in psalms
and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart
to the Lord; giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ" (Eph. 5:17-20). "Wherefore take
unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the
evil day, and having done all, to stand" (Eph. 6:13). "If ye then be
risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affections on things above,
not on things on the earth" (Col. 3:1, 2).

These requirements are evidently heavenly in character, and demand
nothing less than that which is becoming to that sphere. They are,
therefore, beyond human strength; for what human power is able to "give
thanks always for all things"? Or to avoid grieving the Holy Spirit? Who
can be filled with the Spirit, or rejoice in tribulation? In fact, these
demands are often treated as impractical ideals, rather than present
requirements; while in reality they are binding on every child of God.
To fail in them at any point, will not unsave one (Ps. 130:3; Rom. 4:5);
but that failure will profane the heavenly citizenship, dishonor God in
whose grace he is standing (Rom. 5:2), and give the enemy occasion to
accuse the brethren before God; for Satan judges the Christian on the
basis of the heavenly ideals rather than the standards of earth. No one
can contemplate these impossible responsibilities without a sense of
utter helplessness and insufficiency.

Again, the believer must not only meet the impossible demands of a
heavenly position, but he is called upon to face a world-ruling foe,
who, with all his kingdom and power, is seeking to break and mar that
life into which the Divine nature has been received. The revelation
that Satan is going about as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour,
presents a truth that should disarm the believer of all self-confidence
and cause him to dread, above all things else, the subtle devices of
this foe. In this connection Eph. 6:10-12 may well be restated:
"Finally, be strong in the Lord, and in the strength of His might. Put
on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
wiles of the devil. For our wrestling is not against flesh and blood,
but against the principalities, against the powers, against the world
rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual host of wickedness in the
heavenlies." In view of this opposition of Satan, it is still more
evident that the requirements of the Christian life are beyond any human
power.

So, also, there is a fallen human nature within the child of God, which
is prone to dishonor God, and is itself beyond the control of the human
will. This important and much misunderstood truth is taken up at length
in Rom. 7:14-25: "For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am
carnal, sold under sin. For that which I do I allow not: for what I
would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I. If then I do that
which I would not, I consent unto the law that it is good. Now then it
is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. For I know that in
me (that is, in my flesh), dwelleth no good thing: for to will is
present with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not. For
the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I
do. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwelleth in me. I find then a law, that, when I would do good,
evil is present with me. For I delight in the law of God after the
inward man: but I see another law in my members, warring against the law
of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in
my members. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body
of this death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then with
the mind I myself serve the law of God; but with the flesh the law of
sin."

This battle between the old nature and the new is, then, never gained
for God by human power or by religious exercise: but through Christ
alone.

Thus the believer is confronted with a threefold impossibility as he
contemplates his heavenly responsibility. First: The heavenly position
demands a manner of life that is beyond any human possibility. Second:
The enemy is stronger than he, and can thwart every resolution. Third:
His own fallen nature entices him to do positive evil when he would do
good. Notwithstanding this threefold impossibility, there is a clear
call to a victorious life, wherein every thought is brought into
captivity to the obedience of Jesus Christ (II Cor. 10:5), and if he
fails by one degree, he will dishonor the God who has called him.

Where, then, is the relief from this dilemma? It is found only in the
power of God. He has provided a complete salvation from the dominion and
power of evil, which is a real victory--the only victory for the
believer in this present life and conflict. It is a second form or tense
of salvation, for it is possible to be saved from the condemnation and
penalty of sin, and still for a time to be under its dominion and power.
Salvation from the power of the world, the flesh, and the devil, may be
secured as freely and completely as the salvation from the penalty of
sin, and on the same terms; yet its terms and conditions are so unlike
the methods of the world that often it seems unreal, even to Christians.

No instructed person expects to be free from condemnation, or justified
before God, by virtue of his moral character; nor can there be freedom
from the power of sin by virtue of the resolutions of the human will.
Though the Christian life is impossible to human strength, it is within
the power of God; and He offers to supply all that He requires, even to
a completely victorious life. Since it is necessarily a Divine
undertaking, the human part can be no more than an attitude of
expectation or faith toward God,--an attitude which reckons self to be
helpless, and God alone to be sufficient. It is a perpetual realization
of the principle of faith and, therefore, at every point, contradicts
Satan's principle of self-help.

Here, as in every human effort to be God-like, Satan's ideals and
methods are so thrust upon the world that the natural dependence of the
creature upon the Creator is made to seem a weak and unreasonable thing.
This worldly mind has found a place in the Church and to a large extent,
in spite of the teachings of Scripture; and it is often as difficult to
inspire true expectation toward God in the Christian mind in the matter
of daily victory, as it is to move the self-righteous and
self-sufficient sinner to believe on Christ for regeneration.

True dependence upon the sufficiency of God is thus born of a vision of
the utter inability of the natural man to meet the demands of the
heavenly citizenship. The world citizen may wrestle against flesh and
blood to realize his moral ideals: but he has no heavenly standards to
fulfill; no mighty foe to face; and no conflict of natures. Therefore,
his low ideals may often be reached by virtue of his own resolution and
will. Especially will this method be adequate for the unregenerate, as
the energizing power of Satan is working in him to cause him both to
will and to do the purpose of Satan (Eph. 2:2): but the faith principle
is the only possible way to victory for the child of God; and it must be
faith alone.

As the soul may be eternally lost, while calling upon God to help him
save himself: so the saint who only seeks the assistance of God in the
exercise of his own power toward a correct manner of life, may be a
dishonor to God constantly. The principles of faith and of works can no
more be mixed in the one case than in the other. They both present human
impossibilities and, therefore, demand the power of God. The Scriptures
are clear on this point, both in precept and example:

First: The power of God is the believer's sufficiency in meeting the
heavenly demands: "For it is God which worketh in you both to will and
to do of his good pleasure" (Phil. 2:13). "Not that we are sufficient of
ourselves to think anything as of ourselves: but our sufficiency is of
God" (II Cor. 3:5). "But by the grace of God I am what I am: and his
grace which was bestowed upon me was not in vain; but I labored more
abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which was
with me" (I Cor. 15:10). "Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit,
are ye now made perfect by the flesh?" (Gal. 3:3). "Finally my brethren,
be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might" (Eph. 6:10). The
latter passage is but the natural culmination of the whole revelation of
the believer's citizenship and its responsibilities. Therefore, the
final counsel is to be strong in the Lord and in the power of His might.

Second: The conflict with the enemy can be a victory only by the power
of God. A remarkable revelation is given in the Scriptures of the
attitude of the angels toward Satan, and this attitude can well be
considered by fallen man. In Jude 9, Michael, the archangel, is seen in
controversy with Satan over the body of Moses. There is no revelation as
to the time or the occasion of this controversy. It is stated that Moses
was buried in secret and was later seen in his transfigured and
glorified body, so that it is possible that the removal of the body of
Moses from the domain of Satan was the occasion here referred to. The
passage is as follows: "But Michael, the archangel, when contending with
the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against
him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee." In like
manner in II Pet. 2:10, the false teachers of the end of this age are
said to disregard the heavenly powers (evidently evil) which angels dare
not do. "But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of
uncleanness, and despise dominion. Presumptuous are they, self willed,
they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. Whereas angels, which
are greater in power and might, bring not railing accusation against
them before the Lord." There is probably a just regard, on the part of
the angelic beings, for the fact that Satan is the "anointed" of God
(Ezek. 28:14). As David would not lift up his hand against Saul because
he was the "Lord's anointed" (I Sam. 24:6). Christ is said to be
anointed (Ps. 2:2); so also is the believer (I Jno. 2:27). But it is
also shown here that the superior wisdom and strength of even Michael,
the archangel, and all other celestial beings, is never lifted in
conflict with Satan. They rely only upon the same power that is promised
the believer, and well may the believer be instructed by their example.

There are two passages where the child of God is directed to resist the
devil. The context, however, in both passages warns him that it must be
in utter dependence upon the power of God. He must be wholly submitted
to God and it must be done through a steadfastness of faith. The
passages are as follows: "Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the
devil, and he will flee from you" (Jas. 4:7). "Be sober, be vigilant;
because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about,
seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast in the faith" (I Pet.
5:8, 9). And the faith principle is mentioned among the believer's armor
in Eph. 6:16 as the "shield of faith" by which all the fiery darts of
the enemy are to be quenched.

Third: True character may be realized by the power of God, in spite of
the tendency of the fallen nature. This character, however, is that
which is directly promised by the power of God: "But the fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, self control" (Gal. 5:22, 23). "For the fruit of the
Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth" (Eph. 5:9). "Ye
are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because greater is
he that is in you, than he that is in the world" (I Jno. 4:4). Thus the
true God-honoring character is seen to be the result of the power of
God, and it is only possible to the one who has "ceased from his own
labors and has entered into rest." "This is the victory that overcomes
the world, even our faith" (I Jno. 5:4). This victory demands a constant
exercise of faith. Faith is never finished here, and any true progress
in the Christian life is "from faith to faith," and it is also said of
the one whom God has constituted just, that he shall "live by faith."

The same objection is often raised against the application of the faith
principle as a means to the consummation of a victorious life, as is
raised against the same principle for regeneration. In this objection it
is inferred that when this method is adopted, there is no adequate
incentive or motive left for the individual. Such objections arise from
a misunderstanding of this truth.

It is useless to undertake the impossible in any case; and in the matter
of salvation from the penalty of sin, the only work which it is possible
for God to accept as the ground of redemption is that which is already
undertaken and fully completed by Christ on the Cross. By this finished
work the believer is provided with a perfect standing before God, and is
raised to the exalted position of an ambassador for Christ. That
privilege of service does not affect the grounds of his salvation, but
opens to him the glorious possibility of rewards (I Cor. 3:9-15). In the
matter of salvation from the power of sin, the human will may be
employed as an instrument through which the power of God may be
manifested. The following passages reveal how directly He proposes to be
the real power in the believer's life: "For it is God which worketh in
you both to will and to do of his good pleasure" (Phil. 2:13). "For
though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh: for the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the
pulling down of strongholds; casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ" (II Cor.
10:3-5). "I can do all things through Christ which strengthened me"
(Phil 4:13). "For apart from me ye can do nothing" (Jno. 15:5).

It is assumed that the believer has recognized the perfectness of the
will of God and has thrown his whole being open to His power and
guidance. As a little child may avail himself of the wisdom and
experience of his parents through obedience, so the believer has become
willing to do whatever the infinite wisdom and love of God may choose
for him. When thus committed to the will of God, and in true faith
depending on Him, the mighty power of the Spirit will work in him and
through him to the glory of God. "This I say then, Walk in the Spirit,
and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh" (Gal. 5:16). "For the
law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law
of sin and death" (Rom. 8:2). Salvation in any form is, therefore, "not
of works, lest any man should boast."

It remains to be seen, in view of the perilous position of the believer
in the enemy's land, that God has not only provided every needed force
for conquest and victory, but has given positive promises for the
security of the one He has received on the ground of the shed blood of
Christ, "Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and
about all that he hath on every side?" (Job 1:10). "My Father, which
gave them me, is greater than all; and no man (nothing), is able to
pluck them out of my Father's hand" (Jno. 10:29). "There hath no
temptation taken you but such as is common to man: but God is faithful,
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will
with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it" (I Cor. 10:13). "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's
elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is
Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again, who is even at the
right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is
written, For Thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted
as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than
conquerors through Him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord."




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SATAN ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

