Post-Processor and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. Produced from page scans provided by Cornell
University Library.










                                         A
                                      REVIEW
                                       _AND_
                                   EXPOSITION,
                                      OF THE
                                   _FALSEHOODS_
                                        AND
                                _MISREPRESENTATIONS_,
                                       OF A
                                     PAMPHLET
                                _ADDRESSED TO THE_
                            REPUBLICANS OF THE COUNTY OF
                                     SARATOGA,

                                     _SIGNED_,
                                   "A CITIZEN;"


                          PRINTED BY "ULYSSES F. DOUBLEDAY."


                                    BY AN ELECTOR.


                                   _BALLSTON SPA:_
                                    _March 1816_.




TO THE REPUBLICANS OF THE COUNTY OF SARATOGA.



_Fellow-Citizens_.

The pamphlet signed "A Citizen," and entitled "A defence," &c.
generally known by the name of "The Book," has at length made its
appearance; and as was expected, this last effort of an expiring
faction, has excited no other emotions in the mind of an enlightened
public, than those of contempt and pity--Contempt for the miserable
arts of condign despair, and pity like that excited by an object in the
agonies of dissolution, or a maniac dancing in his chains. This
production should have been left to the oblivion which inevitably
awaits it, nor should my pen have been employed in its detection and
exposure, had it not been characterized by the lowest attempts at
concealment and treachery, falsehood and detraction.--Like _Iago_ in
the play, a wretched abandonment of character, a destitution of
principle, and a fiend-like thirst for _revenge_, accompany the author
thro' the whole of his progress, and appear to acquire additional
force, as he approaches the period of his downfall. That it is a
tissue, however, which it requires no strength to burst, will appear by
the examination of a single point on which the whole of the story is
made to rest. If the ridiculous charge made against two or three
individuals that they had cheated Mr. Young out of his nomination,
turns out to be the mere phantom of a disordered imagination, instead
of a logical deduction of truth, if the facts which have been urged in
support of this charge, are the mere creatures of misrepresentation,
prevarication and falsehood; this alone will settle the controversy,
and fix the imputation, upon its unprincipled authors. The loop on
which this absurd tale is made to hang, is the _frail and feeble_
certificate of Ketcham, Gardner and Cowles. That I should be authorised
to apply an epithet more severe than that of frail and feeble, I take
it upon me to prove in the first place by the certificate itself,
compared with one which the same men issued last spring: And in the
next place by a plain statement of facts, given under the solemnity of
an oath, leaving it at present for _atheists_ and blasphemers, (for I
am sure none others will) to ascribe greater moral certainty to a
certificate carrying on the face of it miserable evasion, than to a
history sanctioned by an appeal to the Christians God.

That this certificate is both suspicious and evasive, I appeal to the
pamphlet page 27. Why do they not tell their fellow-citizens, that
_they did not collectively or individually during that session charge
Young with ill-treatment towards them_? Would not this have been
perfectly easy if true? Why do they blink the question, and tell a long
story about a conversation which they held with Mr. Bunce, which
whether it was true or untrue, is totally immaterial? What do they mean
in a later stage of their certificate, by the _unsuspecting and_
_unguarded conversation_, they had held with Mr. Bunce, and which they
were afraid he would make mischief of? Do they call the conversation
which they detail an unguarded one? Or was it some other conversation
and conversations which shall be proved upon them? Instead of saying
that they expressed no opinion to Bunce that "Young ought not _again_
to be nominated," why do they not tell us, whether they or either of
them expressed any opinion to Bunce, or any other person, against his
nomination _the then next spring_? In Mr. Kasson's letter (p. 33) it
appears they told him that "_Bunce and another gentleman_" called on
them, with whom they held a conversation; whereas the one given in
their recent certificate is confined exclusively to Bunce. Read also
the following certificate of these men, which they gave to the public
last spring; in which they admit some other conversation which they
call _a free and unreserved conversation_, and protest against the
"treacherous perversion" of it.


"_To the Citizens of the county of Saratoga_."

"Having heard that a private conversation of ours has been represented
to our Fellow Citizens in a light unfavorable to the character of
Samuel Young, Esq. and has been used to his prejudice, in the
estimation of his constituents.--We discharge a duty grateful to our
individual feelings, due to the feelings and character of a highly
useful, able, faithful and industrious Member of Assembly, and due to
our county, to express our _pointed indignation_ against the
_treacherous perversion_ of the spirit of a free and unreserved
conversation by stating to our fellow citizens, that we have always
lived in the most perfect harmony with Mr. Young, have had with him on
all legislative business the most cordial co-operation and concert:
that his uniform deportment towards us has been friendly and decorous,
and that we never gave an intimation of any wish or opinion against his
renomination to the Assembly.--HOWEL GARDNER, RICHARD KETCHUM, BENJAMIN
COWLES. _Albany, April 17, 1815_."[1]

Whatever name these gentlemen, may have given to their conversations,
some times calling them _unsuspecting and unguarded_, and sometimes
_free and unreserved_, in order to determine their nature and place
them in a clear light, I shall now go on to shew the public what they
did say, and not stop to quarrel about names so long as I am sure that
public will be content with the things themselves. I challenge
incredulity itself after reading the following affidavits and
statements, to doubt one moment on the subject.

     "Isaiah Bunce & Thomas Palmer being duly sworn, say, that
     they were at Albany in the early part of the late session of
     the Legislature, and put up at the house where the Delegates
     of the county of Saratoga quartered. That they and three of
     the Delegates from said county, viz. Messrs. Ketcham, Gardner
     and Cowles, conversed freely with each other on various
     political subjects, and in one conversation they had with
     these said Members, they told these Deponents, that they had
     not been well treated by their colleague Mr. Young--spoke
     freely of their unpleasant situation, owing to that
     treatment, mentioning a number of instances illustrating the
     same, both in the fall session and the then session of the
     Legislature.

     "And these deponents further say, that they the said Ketcham,
     Gardner and Cowles, did in that conversation, decidedly
     express their opinion that the said Young ought not to
     represent this county again in the next session--at the same
     time signifying that they had no wish, that the talents of
     Mr. Young should be lost to the county, but believed it would
     be for his benefit, should he not be elected the ensuing
     session--or language to that import.

     "And these deponents further say, that this conversation took
     place while it was generally believed and expected, and so
     expressed by the said Ketcham, Cowles and Gardner in
     particular, that Mr. Young would in a day or two, be
     appointed Secretary of the State of New-York.--ISAIAH BUNCE,
     THOMAS PALMER. _Sworn the 5th day of May, in the Year 1815,
     before me SAMUEL COOK, Master in Chancery_."

     "John Dunning being sworn saith, That in March last, He went
     to Albany and there saw Benjamin Cowles Esq. one of the
     Delegates from Saratoga, who told this deponent, that Samuel
     Young Esq. had treated the Members of this county with
     neglect, that their situation owing to the treatment they had
     received from him was very disagreeable, or words to that
     amount--mentioning instances of that neglect &c.

     "And this deponent further saith, That on his return from
     Albany, he overtook Richard Ketchum Esq. then going to visit
     his family in Stillwater--that he conversed with the said
     Ketchum, on the subject of Mr. Young's treatment to them, who
     informed this deponent the same as Mr. Cowles had done, and
     related several circumstances confirming the same.--JOHN
     DUNNING. Subscribed and sworn before me, Philo T. Beebe, one
     of the Justices of the Peace in Malta, County of Saratoga,
     the 4th day of May 1815_. PHILO T. BEEBE, _Justice of the
     Peace_.

     "Amos Allcott being sworn saith, that Messrs. Ketchum,
     Gardner and Cowles, three of the Delegates from the county of
     Saratoga, some time in March last, when at Albany, told this
     Deponent, that they had been ill-treated, or not well treated
     by Samuel Young Esq. their colleague--and expressed their
     opinion and wishes fully, that some other person than he,
     should the next session represent this county in Assembly.
     Mr. Ketchum in presence of the other two, said he had made up
     his mind fully in favor of George Palmer, Esq. or Esek Cowen
     Esq. being the man, to which the other two appeared to
     assent.--Mr. Gardner however remarked, that _some said_ Mr.
     Young might be sufficiently, mortified by not being appointed
     Secretary of State.--AMOS ALLCOTT. _Sworn the 5th day of May,
     in the Year 1815, before me SAMUEL COOK Master in Chancery_."

     "Lewis B. Edwards being sworn saith, That a few days after
     Mr. Bunce and Palmer returned from Albany--Mr. Gardner Member
     of Assembly, called at the office of the _Saratoga Journal_,
     on his way home to see his family, and told Mr. Bunce among
     other things, that Mr. Young had lost the Office of Secretary
     of State, and that Mr. Porter was appointed. And further
     remarked, 'it may be best to suspend the thing we talked of,
     his loosing that may humble him enough, pride will have a
     all'--or words to that import.

     "And this Deponent further saith, That about a fortnight
     after this, Mr. Cowles one of the other Members of Assembly,
     called at the Office on his return from Hadley to the
     Legislature, and on Mr. Bunce, asking him whether Mr. Young
     had treated them any better since his disappointment, he
     replied he had not--and that Mr. Young had never yet even
     asked them to walk to the House with him or words to that
     effect. On the said Bunces enquiry whether he had mentioned
     the subject to any of his friends while at home--he replied
     that he intended to have done so to Esq. Rockwell, but he had
     missed of him returning from Albany. Mr. Rockwell, as
     appeared having gone to Albany while Mr. Cowles was going to
     Hadley.--LEWIS B. EDWARDS. _Sworn the fifth day of May, in
     the year 1815, before me SAMUEL COOK, Master in Chancery_."

It is here proper to remark, that on the 18th of April, the day of the
McBain meeting; Judge Child, recommended that no publication he made on
either side, and that after election a meeting should take place
between the members and Messrs. Bunce and Palmer, and endeavor to come
to an amicable explanation. Mr. Stillwell, will well remember, that two
days afterwards he called on Mr. Palmer, with a message from Judge
Child, requesting him, "by all means not to publish any thing during
the election, relative to the conversation with the members," to which
Mr. Palmer readily assented. Notwithstanding which, the next day the
certificate of the members, were brought to the Federal Printing
Office, and several hundred copies struck off, with the knowledge of
Mr. Stillwell, who then kept his office within a few rods of the
Federal Press. Yet no contrary statements were published during the
election, nor until after two or three weeks had expired after the time
set by Mr. Cowles, for the members to meet Messrs. Bunce and Palmer.
The members were requested by several Republicans to meet; they were
finally publicly invited in the Journal, but contrary to the
expectations and wishes of a great portion of the Republicans of the
County, they did not come forward; and the above affidavits were
published. And here the controversy on this point might have ended; but
it seems the members, or rather the 'Citizen,' was not satisfied, and
he procures _another_ certificate from them, which may be seen in page
27 28 and 29 of that pamphlet. Compare their _two_ statements--examine
the above affidavits again--read the following certificates, and judge
for yourselves.

     "I hereby certify, that I met Benjamin Cowles, Esq. at Jones'
     Inn in Halfmoon, _on his return home from the Legislature_,
     on the 20th of April last, two days after the McBain meeting,
     and we there conversed together on the subject of the
     conversation he Messrs. Ketchum and Gardner, had with Messrs.
     Bunce and Palmer, in Albany, (where it was alleged that they
     Ketchum, Cowles and Gardner, had complained of vanity,
     neglect and ill-treatment of Mr. Young.) That I expressed my
     surplice to Mr. Cowles, that he, (Cowles) Ketchum and Gardner
     should lend their names to an instrument denying the
     conversation above alluded to, when he Cowles, Ketchum and
     Gardner, knew they had not only complained to Bunce and
     Palmer, but to myself and others. To which he answered, that
     the certificate given by them was not given meaning to deny
     any thing that had been said as respected ill-treatment, &c.
     of Mr. Young, but only to re-but other things which the
     gentlemen who called for the certificate, (among whom were
     James Thompson, Esq.) represented to have been said. On which
     I suggested the propriety of his calling on Bunce and Palmer,
     at the Springs; and immediately getting his colleagues to
     meet them, and have the thing explained, and prevent improper
     use being made of their certificate; to which preposition he,
     after expressing his regret that it had become public,
     cordially acceded. I then parted with him on my way to
     New-York.--AMOS ALLCOTT, _Ballston Spa, March 1816_."

     "I certify, that Mr. Cowles did on that day, (20th April)
     call on Mr. Bunce as mentioned in the above certificate of
     Mr. Allcott he had agreed to do, and after some conversation
     on the subject, in which he admitted that he, Gardner and
     Ketchum, had complained of Young's ill treatment and
     haughtiness to them, and their expressing their opinion
     against his being nominated as a candidate for that election
     &c. he strongly solicited Mr. Bunce to have nothing published
     in his paper on the subject, till he could go and see his
     colleagues, Mr. Gardner and Ketchum, and get them to meet and
     have the affair explained and reconciled, which he said he
     would at all events endeavor to do before the next paper
     should come out, [this being _Thursday_, and the paper not to
     appear before the next _Wednesday_,] that he was then in a
     great hurry, and must get home that night, but he would make
     it his business to immediately attend to it; to which
     proposition Mr. Bunce readily agreed, and promised Mr. Cowles
     accordingly. This conversation was in the office of the
     Saratoga Journal, in the room in which I was at work. The
     next day however, information was brought to Mr. Bunce in the
     office, that the certificate of the said Cowles, Gardner and
     Ketchum, denying the conversation relative to Mr. Young, was
     then striking off at Mr. Comstock's Office in this place, and
     shortly after a _printed copy_ was brought into the office.--
     LEWIS B. EDWARDS. _Ballston Spa, March 1816_."

     "I certify, that shortly after the rising of the Legislature,
     I saw Benjamin Cowles, Esq. in the village of Ballston Spa,
     on his way home; And in a conversation with him relative to
     the reports respecting Mr. Young, I asked him whether he had
     not told Mr. Bunce and Palmer, 'that Mr. Young had treated
     his colleagues with neglect, and that his treatment towards
     them was haughty and reserved,' to which Mr. Cowles answered
     in the affirmative. I further asked him if he did not tell
     Mr. Palmer and Bunce, 'that he was convinced of Mr. Young's
     vanity, previous to his being in the Legislature with him,'
     and state as an example 'that while they were Supervisors,
     they were appointed a committee to arrange or make out an
     account, for the board of Supervisors, and that he the said
     Benjamin Cowles, Esq. made out the account himself and
     delivered it to Mr. Y. who copied and presented it to the
     board of Supervisors, and claimed the credit of it himself.'
     To all of which Mr. Cowles answered in the affirmative, and
     expressed a wish that Mr. B. and P. would not publish any
     thing concerning the conversation, as he was anxious to see
     Messrs. Gardner and Ketchum, and have the affair reconciled.
     He further stated that he did not think that the certificate
     given by Mr. Ketchum, Gardner and himself, to Jas. Thompson;
     Esq. did deny the conversation with Bunce and Palmer.--A.W.
     ODELL. _Ballston Spa, March, 1816_."

     "I certify that some time in the month of February 1815,
     Benjamin Cowles, Esq. came home from the Legislature on a
     visit, that I saw Mr. Cowles at Ensign's Inn, in the town of
     Hadley, in which town we both reside; and that we then and
     there entered into a conversation concerning Mr. Young, and
     that Mr. Cowles intimated to me that Mr. Young's treatment
     was haughty towards the members, and said that he was
     disappointed in his expectations in the treatment he received
     from Mr. Young, and he further told me that he thought it
     would be as well to send some _other_ man to the Legislature
     the then ensuing year.

     "I further certify, that some time in the fall of 1815, I had
     another conversation with the said Benjamin Cowles, Esq. on
     the subject of the affidavits that had been published,
     relative to the conversation said to have passed between
     Isaiah Bunce and Thomas Palmer, and the members in Albany;
     and that during that conversation he did not contradict the
     statements published, but gave me to understand that the same
     were true, and intimated that he had inconsiderately signed
     the certificate published during the election.

     "I further certify, that Mr. Cowles was the first person, who
     informed me of the ill-treatment the members had received
     from Mr. Young, and that it would be as well to send some
     other person to the Legislature the ensuing year.--BARRY
     FENTON. _Hadley, March 1816_."

     "I, Jacob Thorn, of Galway, in the county of Saratoga; do
     certify, that shortly after the affidavits of Messrs. Bunce,
     Palmer, Allcott, Dunning and Edwards, were published,
     relative to the conversation they had with Messrs. Ketcham,
     Gardner and Cowles in Albany; I had a conversation with Mr.
     Ketcham in Stillwater, relative to the affidavits published.
     I told him if the affidavits were not true, he ought to
     contradict them. He replied, that his _friends advised him to
     say nothing about it_. I enquired of him the meaning of those
     affidavits---and whether the facts therein stated were
     true--to which the said Ketcham answered, that _they were
     true_--but said he did not expect it would have been made
     public.--JACOB THORN."

     "I certify, that some time in the month of March 1815, I went
     to Albany on business, and called at the house where the
     members of this county resided; found Messrs. Gardner,
     Ketcham and Cowles, and made my business known. Mr. Cowles
     said he would call and see me at my lodgings. Accordingly he
     did; told me it was not according to his wish, that what I
     had to offer in the business could not be complied with. I
     then asked where Mr. Young quartered? He said he would tell
     me; on the way, Mr. Cowles said there had been _a coldness
     between the Speaker of the House, and the members from this
     County, since he became speaker and expected to be Secretary
     of State_, and on that account _declined going_.--JONATHAN
     KELLOGG. _Northumberland, April 8th 1816_."

     "I hereby solemnly certify, that some time in the month of
     February, 1815, (and I believe in the early part of it,) in a
     conversation Col. John Prior had with me just after his
     return from Albany, on the subject of candidates for the then
     approaching election; he the said Prior remarked, that 'Mr.
     Young was not so popular as he had been.' On my asking him
     why, he replied, 'for his ill treatment to his colleagues,
     having grown haughty, &c.' This I understood him to have
     received directly from the said members, Messrs. Gardner,
     Cowles and Ketcham. In the spring of the same year, after
     Messrs. Palmer and Bunce had made known similar complaints,
     that the said three members had made to them of Young's
     treatment, I had another conversation with the said Prior on
     the subject, in which he the said Prior intimated, 'he did
     not believe the said members had told the said Palmer and
     Bunce what they had pretended.' I then asked him, if the
     members were not as likely to tell them of it, as himself,
     and repeated to the said Prior what he had told me in the
     winter, of the members having made the same complaint to him,
     which the said Prior did not pretend to deny as having heard
     from the members, nor having told me the same.--JOSEPH
     MITCHEL. _Dated, Greenfield, March 15, 1815_."

     "I hereby certify, that in the early part of the winter past,
     I had a conversation with Isaac Myers of Stillwater, relative
     to the conduct of Richard Ketcham, late a member of the
     Legislature; when he the said Myers told me that _he knew_
     the said Ketcham had _contradicted himself_, relative to what
     he had said of Mr. Young; that _previous_ to the McBain
     meeting, Ketcham had _denied_ to him, ever saying any thing
     _against_ Young, or complaining of his treatment; but that
     _afterwards_ he had _owned to several in his presence, that
     he had spoken against_ Young, &c.--ASA B. JEWEL. _Saratoga,
     March 25th 1816_."

Other affidavits and statements might be produced to the same effect
but twelve or fourteen different conversations, at different times,
and, in presence of different men are already proved upon them, all
importing explicitly that Mr. Young had ill-treated or neglected
them--and shewing a desire on their part that Mr. Young should not be
sent to the Legislature the ensuing year. If then Mr. Young had an
undoubted right to a seat in the legislature, which would perhaps be
questionable upon republican ground, and was deprived of that right by
"management and fraud," with whom did this system of corruption
commence! and to whose account ought it to be placed? To that of his
colleagues, or other men whom their misstatements and falsehoods had
seduced? It may however, be very well to enquire whether these
declarations were ever made use of to any purpose, and whether Mr.
Young must have succeeded in his nomination, had these _free_ and
_unreserved_ conversations of his colleagues, been kept entirely out of
view; whether Palmer and Bunce, were alone in singling out the
candidate who was nominated, or whether some other person or persons
had not tho't of him even _before_ Palmer and Bunce went to Albany.

Among the names which ornament the pages of "_The Citizen_," I observe
that of a _recent_ convert to the doctrine of "_Falsehood, Fraud & Co_"
viz: William Stillwell, late a Judge, and now Clerk of this county.
This political _Proteus_, together with a number of his, friends was I
believe, among the first to start Mr. Cowen as a candidate, before the
county convention, and was from time to time very importunate with him,
to consent that his name should be made use of for this purpose. From
the early part of February 1815, until he had got the Clerk's office,
be appears to have been Mr. Cowen's indefatigable supporter. At the
McBain meeting however, he was as active and diligent to get rid of
that nomination, as he had before been to effect it. Thomas Palmer,
Esq. the secretary of that meeting, together with. Judge Stillwell,
were chosen two of the committee to draw up the proceedings, and were
unquestionably in all respects the proper organ for that purpose.
Sensible of this, Judge Stillwell, the evening after the meeting,
_invited Mr. Palmer to his house_, where _they_ deliberately, and
without any _disagreement_ drew up the statement, published p. 24 and
25, of their pamphlet. They _jointly reviewed_ this statement the _next
morning--agreed_ in its correctness, and ordered it to be printed.
Shortly after, without the knowledge of Mr. Palmer or Mr. Cowen,
Stillwell _secretly withdraws_ this statement from the printing office,
and adopts and signs _another_ drawn up by Mr. Thompson, _differing in
many respects from the first_. This last statement the secretary
refused to sign, and his name was inserted as you will see by the
statement itself, p. 16, without his knowledge or authority. Having
thus boxed the compass and settled down upon _point no point_, it is
not surprising that when Stillwell lends his name to "_The Citizen_"
and appears in his Book, as the flaming advocate for "fair and open
conduct," and the zealous _detector_ of "fraud and duplicity," that he
should hypocritically _skulk behind the scene_, and keep himself as
much out of view as possible, in the strange and opposite parts which
he had acted. The singular course which this man (Stillwell) had
pursued both in and out of "the book," and especially his attempt to
shew that "Mr. Cowen's nomination was procured by fraud, &c." drew the
following sentiments from Doctor Clark, (who was one of the convention
which nominated Mr. Cowen) expressed in a letter to Thomas Palmer,
Esq.--

     "_Moreau, March 12th 1816_.

     Dear Sir,

     Having seen and examined a publication signed "A Citizen,"
     purporting to be an apology and justification of the
     gentlemen who composed the McBain meeting. In that
     publication I observe a studied and systematic attempt to fix
     on you and Mr. Bunce, the blame of having started Esek Cowen
     Esq. as a candidate for assembly, and of having procured his
     nomination by _fraud_ and _intrigue_. In consequence of
     seeing Wm. Stillwell's name affixed to the proceedings of
     that meeting, and being well informed that the said Stillwell
     hath gone great length to justify the conduct of the said
     meeting, in making void the nomination made by the county
     convention, I feel myself constrained by a sense of justice
     to declare, that some time on or about the 11th day of
     February 1815, being in company with Esek Cowen, at the house
     of Wm. Stillwell Esq., he the said Stillwell did then and
     there introduce the subject of the then next election, by
     saying, that himself and a number of others had conversed on
     the subject, and agreed that Mr. Cowen ought to be a
     candidate--That Mr. Cowen made objections, and mentioned to
     him the names of several other gentlemen as being proper
     candidates in preference to himself; to which Mr. Stillwell
     objected, and urged Mr. Cowen with apparent zeal to suffer
     his name to be made use of as a candidate. Sir, you are at
     liberty to make such use of the above statement of facts, as
     in your judgment you shall think proper.

     Yours, Respectfully, B.J. Clark.

     Hon. T. Palmer Esq."

It will also appear _amongst other things_, by the following letter
written by John R. Mott,[2] who I believe is the second certifier in
"the book," that Judge Stillwell entertained sentiments opposed to Mr.
Young's nomination, as late as the _sixth_ of _April_.

     "_Saratoga, April 6, 1815_.

     Dear sir,

     It was late when I returned from Ballston, which prevented my
     calling on you I had conversations with _several gentlemen_
     on the subject of the nomination, particularly with _Judge
     Stillwell_, capt. Odell and Mr. Bunce, by whom I learned the
     sentiments of Mr. Palmer, and find the whole to be opposed to
     Mr. Young. I also saw Mr. Lee and Kasson. They were in favor
     of Mr. Young on the principle of _what they called
     sacrificing_ Mr. Young, if he was not nominated. The Milton
     committee are Thomas Palmer, Joel Keeler and Daniel Couch,
     junior Esquires.

     From yours, with esteem,

     Esek Cowen, Esq."

     JOHN R. MOTT.


Mr. Mott, one of the delegation from Saratoga, informs Mr. Cowen
another of the delegation from that town, that Stillwell and others are
opposed to Young. This presumption in Judge Stillwell, it seems could
not be endured, and he in common with others was marked out as a
victim. His name was originally connected with that of Palmer and
Bunce, in the letter of Kasson, dated the 12th April, p. 33, as being
concerned with them in "this _black business_" as he calls it, until by
making his peace, this _crow_ is suddenly changed into a _swan_, and
his name erased from the letter.

If farther proof is wanting that the loss of Mr. Young's nomination did
not depend on any thing which fell from his colleagues, or any
individual exertion made against it, you may have it by calling on the
following gentlemen, who acted on the county convention, to wit:

     Avery Starkweather, John Pettit, Eli Smith, Joel Keeler,
     Isaac Rice, Nathan Raymond, Jessup Raymond, Richard Dunning,
     James Clark, Isaac Andrus, Solomon Parks, Nicholas W. Angle,
     Billy J. Clark, Potter Johnson, Benjamin Burton, Joseph
     Mitchell, William Taylor, Samuel Cook, Nathan Pardee, Joshua
     Finch, John Brown, Samuel S. Barker, Isaac Brewster, &c.

You will find among them many of the most respectable names in the
county. By them it will also appear how far Mr. Young's failure
depended on Palmer and Bunce, and how far it was regulated by public
sentiment. But, it is presumed that what Doctor Clark very properly
calls a _systematic attempt_, to fix a course of fraud upon two or
three individuals, and ascribe the result of that convention to them,
must appear as absurd and ridiculous in the eyes of the public, as it
did to Doctor Clark and his associates on the committee.

But why spend a moments time in refuting so base a calumny; by
searching for argument and demonstration while it must be rendered
useless by conviction. Another year has rolled away; another convention
have met--have made a nomination for Congress and Assembly--They were
unanimous--Mr. Young is not nominated, nor even named for the year
1816. This too was not till the blood-hounds of imaginary fraud had
yelled their notes thro' the county, the quivers of malice had been
exhausted of their poisoned arrows, and "the book," that great gun of a
falling faction which they had been loading during the whole Summer
past, had gone off with a harmless explosion.

It may not be amiss however, to examine the behaviour of these famous
pretenders to fair and open conduct, and see how far they practice what
they preach. In doing this, permit me to call your attention to the
following certificates.

     "I notice in the pamphlet signed 'A Citizen' lately
     published, an assertion that the committee in the town of
     _Milton_ in the Spring of 1815, 'was procured by management,
     fraud and falsehood.' I attended the meeting in this town,
     according to previous notice in the Journal for that purpose,
     at which I saw Mr. T. Palmer and Mr. Bunce, but saw nothing
     in them like either fraud or management. I voted in that
     committee for Mess. Palmer, Keeler and Couch, but not from
     any solicitations of either Mr. Bunce or Mr. Palmer, but
     because I believed them the best men; nor had any one of
     these, or any one else, then told me that the three members
     had complained of Mr. Young.

     "James Thompson, Esq. was a candidate for the same committee,
     and his partner, Alpheus Goodrich, Esq. wrote votes for the
     said James Thompson; but I refused to vote for him, not,
     however, from any thing I had ever heard either the said
     Palmer or Bunce say against him. There was a large majority
     for the three above named committee, but I saw no unusual
     exertions, or any thing that looked like unfair proceedings,
     in any one at the meeting who appeared to be voting the
     ticket which I did.--EBENEZER DIBBLE. _Milton, March, 1816_."

     "I also was present at the above mentioned meeting for the
     purpose of choosing delegates to the county convention. The
     meeting was notified in the Journal, at Gregory & Hawkins',
     on the day some of the town officers met there. The meeting
     proceeded to organize by choosing Joel Keeler, Esq. chairman,
     and Thomas Palmer secretary, and then without opposition,
     voted to choose the committee by ballot. The candidates for
     whom ballots were wrote, were, on one ticket, James Thompson,
     Archy Kasson and Elias Benedict--On the other, Daniel Couch
     jun, Joel Keeler and Thomas Palmer. Mr. Bunce was there; and
     in the room, wrote votes for the latter three gentlemen, for
     whom I voted, but not from the insinuations or persuasions of
     any one. And I saw no intrigue, management or improper
     electioneering in either the said Palmer or Bunce, or any one
     else for that ticket; but believe every thing was conducted
     fairly.

     "I had on that day, before I came there, heard of reports
     against Mr. Young, but not from either Mr. Palmer or Mr.
     Bunce; but to the best of my recollection from _Elihu Roe_ in
     a conversation between him and _Deacon Stillwell_. I had
     before heard no intimation of the same from any one.--EZRA
     NASH. _Milton, March 1816_."

     "I was present at the republican meeting in Milton, in the
     Spring of 1815, for the purpose of choosing a committee to
     meet the general committee to make a nomination. I saw no
     deception or intrigue on the part of either Mr. Palmer or Mr.
     Bunce, nor any particular exertion of either of them to
     procure the committee that were elected. Some time _before_
     the said meeting, I had understood that James Thompson, Esq.
     of said town, had _expressed a wish_ to be one of the
     committee, and at the above mentioned meeting Alpheus
     Goodrich, Esq. _his partner_ took a very active part to get
     him appointed--wrote votes and endeavored to get others to
     take them and vote for the said Thompson, his name being on
     the same ticket with Archy Kasson and Elias Benedict; but
     they received at the meeting, which consisted of about
     thirty, but very few votes, the other ticket, which I voted,
     obtaining a large majority. And I hereby further certify,
     that neither the said Palmer nor Bunce, both being present at
     the meeting, had ever informed me, or given me an intimation
     that there was any complaint against Mr. Young, nor did I
     ever hear of any complaints against Young, from any one until
     some time afterwards; and from the best of my recollection,
     _Joel Lee_ was the first who informed me of these complaints
     against the said Young.--DAVID DERRICK. _Milton, March
     1816_."

It appears that in the town of Milton Mr. Archy Kasson, Elias Benedict
and James Thompson Esq. were candidates at the meeting in that town for
the choice of delegates in 1815.--That Alpheus Goodrich Esq. Thompson's
partner, in particular, acted decidedly in favor of "_Master Jimmy_" as
he calls him, perhaps with a good deal of propriety, and peddled
tickets with Mr. Kasson and his master's name on them. Now Mr. Thompson
whose situation in point of _popularity_ especially in his _own town_
is not to be questioned, was very naturally surprised at his failure,
and could not in his own mind attribute it to any thing short of
"_fraud and management_." He had failed in despite of the combined
efforts of his partner and Mr. Kasson. Finding how poor doctor Child
had been cheated into a vote for three gentlemen whom Thompson
considered mere tools compared to himself, it leaves him no doubt on
the subject, and he can no longer avoid bristling with astonishment and
rage. Tho' several days before the convention met, a hue and cry was
immediately raised, and he repairs to court with almost the whole of
the McBain meeting at his heels--The convention till this year (1816)
had regularly met on the second day of April court.

The evil of this practice had been long felt and deplored by the
advocates for freedom of deliberation in this body, without being able
to attain a remedy. The scenes of this day however have for a while
suspended, and I trust forever abolished the pernicious and degrading
practice of _court_ conventions. Tuesday gave them leisure to organize
their forces and reconnoiter the points of attack. On Wednesday these
veteran lobby members of a county convention each knew his post, and
each was prepared with his story. The members of the convention, living
scattered in different directions, some near and some in the more
remote towns, arrive in small parties of one, two, and three in
succession, which gives full leisure to the court hangers on to see and
discourse with them in detail, and the astonished members of the
convention the moment they arrive were thus assailed on all hands with
a universal cry of Young, Young, Young for the candidate. No scheme was
left untried, no pretence neglected, no argument overlooked, no path
unexplored to entrap, to drive, to persuade and to lead the convention
contrary to their old established practice, to nominate Mr. Young a
_third_ time as a candidate. Still despairing of success, Thompson and
his associates (I trust in God but few of them) change their ground and
become the _black and unmanly assassins_ of individual character. The
story of the pretended fraud attempted by Mr. Palmer, Mr. Bunce and
others, was administered in profusion, and crammed down with epithets;
not more than two or three of the convention having ever heard the
account given of Mr Young by his worthy colleagues, and its reaching
them thus for the first time thro' his huffing friends, it sounded
truly like "a tale told by an idiot full of sound and fury, signifying
nothing." Their pride was alarmed, and their sympathies excited, by
being told that Judge Spencer had first cheated Mr. Young out of the
Secretary's office, and that his wrath now burnt after him into the
county of Saratoga, and what was passing strange--pitiful and wondrous
pitiful was, that the Judge had thrust his hand so far into this dish
of woes as to employ in his service the press and Editor of the
Saratoga Journal.--Kasson's letter which appears in "the book," tho'
now altered by striking out Stillwell's name, arrives by _express from
Albany_, in season to make up for this dish, its last ingredient--But
Alas! to no purpose; the people's delegates nominate Mr. Cowen.

I boldly and solemnly appeal to that convention whether they or the
most of them were not individually called upon, by Thompson or some of
those acting under him, and urged to support Mr. Young upon part or all
of the pretences above mentioned. In order to render assurance doubly
sure, these strong and noisy opposers of fraud, these high minded and
honest politicians discover another circumstance of which they quickly
avail themselves. One of the towns had neglected to choose a committee.
The ceremony of packing was immediately resorted to, and three men who
were ready to go all lengths with these upright gentry, presented and
palmed themselves upon the convention, as legitimate members. Thus
having been belabored incessantly for two-thirds of an April day, the
convention retire to their duty, and as usual ballot for the
candidates. After balloting and before the votes were canvassed, they
unanimously resolve, that the lawyer having the greatest number of
votes shall be considered the candidate, and the other rejected. After
canvassing and finding that Mr. Cowen had two votes more than Mr.
Young, it was again unanimously resolved that he be considered the
candidate.

This _arrogance_ and _presumption_ in the delegates of the people, was
not tamely to be endured by the _court party_; and these high-minded
advocates of _Republican purity_ immediately cast about for the means
of correcting the evil. And what more easy and certain mode of doing
this, than to solicit and procure the friendly interference of
_federalism_, whose doctrine by this time appears to be in perfect co
incidence with their own? They could abhor coalition, management and
intrigue in the ranks of Republicans;--nay the intrigue which owed its
birth and maturity to their heated imaginations alone, was odious and
abominable in its fancied perpetrators; while they themselves were
basely courting the embraces of Federalism in secret; and building
their hopes of success on the vile basis of a _political bargain_ with
that party;--like a drunken clergyman who enters the pulpit heated with
his bottle, and excites your disgust by a long discourse on the follies
of intemperance. The high pretensions of these men to chastity and
plain dealing, will be better tested by reading the following
certificates;--the reader being first reminded that Mr. Elihu Roe and
James Thompson, Esq. are holden forth both in _the book_, and in these
statements, as twin leaders--a sort of _Castor_ and _Pollux_ or
_du_-umvirate in the tribe; and for this reason they are resorted to,
as furnishing together with a few subordinate officers, a clue to the
immaculate character which they and their friends so loudly claim.

     "I certify, that I heard Elihu Roe declare, to Jonathan
     Minor, at the store of Epenetus White, that James Thompson
     Esq. had at the last election, made overtures to the
     federalists to support Samuel Young Esq as a member of
     Assembly.--BURR WAKEMAN. _March 1816_."

     "Thereby certify, that I had a conversation with Mr. Elihu
     Roe, in the store of Epenetus White, in the presence of Mr.
     Burr Wakeman, in which Mr. Roe declared that James Thompson
     Esq. did propose to the federalists, to support a federal
     candidate for member of Assembly, if the federalists would
     support Samuel Young, Esq. as a candidate for member of
     Assembly at the election of 1815.--JONATHAN MINOR. _Ballston,
     March 28th 1816_."

     "I, Gideon Goodrich, late of the town of Milton, in the
     county of Saratoga, do hereby certify to my fellow-citizens;
     that on the first day of election of 1815 in said town, where
     I then resided, at St. John's Inn, where the polls of
     election were that day held, in a conversation on the subject
     of supporting Samuel Young, contrary to the general
     nomination; Archy Kasson, a leading friend of Young admitted
     in presence of a number of persons, that he had said that he
     had rather have three federalists go to the legislature from
     this county with Young, than not to have Young elected. On my
     expressing surprise at such sentiments, from a man professing
     to be a republican, he added he still felt or thought so. Mr.
     James Thompson who was present, then replied, that he would
     say he had rather have _seven_ federalist go with Young, than
     not to have him elected--or any number that would not give a
     federal majority,[3] or words to that import.

     "Having removed from this county, but now on a visit at my
     old residence in Milton, and being called upon by those who
     feel themselves abused in the support of the cause of their
     country, no one will consider it officiousness in me, to thus
     repeat what was expressed in so public a manner on that
     occasion.--GIDEON GOODRICH. _Milton, April 19th 1816_."

     "I hereby certify, that shortly after the last spring's
     election, but before the official returns of election in the
     state were received, I was at the office of James Thompson,
     Esq. in Milton, and remarked to him, that I was afraid the
     legislature would be federal, to which the said Thompson
     replied, that he was afraid it would _not be federal_, or
     that he began to be afraid there would not be _a federal_
     house. I also certify, that during the election then just
     past, I was by several of Mr. Young's friends in said town,
     strongly urged to vote for a federalist, if by that I could
     get a federalist to vote for Mr. Young; which I believe many
     of them did, as I heard those friends of his repeatedly say
     _they would barter_ in that way, if they could by it obtain
     votes for the said Young.--BENJAMIN BENNETT. _Milton, March
     1816_."

     "I hereby certify, that previous to the meeting of the
     committee to make a nomination for members of Assembly, in
     the spring of 1815--I saw Archy Kasson in the village of
     Ballston Spa, who commenced a conversation with me on the
     subject of the then approaching nomination; and he solicited
     me with much zeal to vote for Mr. Young in the
     convention--And among other things, he declared, that he
     would be better satisfied to have Mr. Young on the nomination
     with three federalists, than to have four republicans without
     him--And gave me distinctly to understand that if Young was
     not nominated, he would not support the nomination.--ISAAC
     RICE. _Ballston, March 1816_."

     "I, Simeon P. Allcott, of the town of Milton and county of
     Saratoga, do certify; That I attended the election in the
     spring of 1815, at D. Thomas' inn, in said town, at which
     place I saw James Merrill of said town, and heard him declare
     in the presence and hearing of a number of republican and
     federal electors, 'that some people very fearful that a
     _federalist_ would be elected from this county, but for his
     part, he said that there would be no _harm in it_--it would
     be a _good thing to have federals elected_--and that if Mr.
     Young could be elected, he did not care _how many federals_
     were elected.'

     "I further certify, that I attended the election the
     following day at Goodrich's inn, in the said town, and the
     said James Merrill then and there made similar declarations
     in the presence and hearing of a number of republicans and
     federals; and the said James Merrill and others who were
     advocating the election of Mr. Young, appeared to act in
     unison with _the federalists_; and I saw a number of
     _federalists have Mr. Young's name on their ticket_, and who
     told me they voted that ticket.--SIMEON P. ALLCOTT. _Milton,
     April 1816_."

     "I hereby certify, that a leading federalist, being as I
     understood, one of the _federal_ convention from the town of
     Northumberland, who met at the Court-House on the 14th of
     April last, to make the federal nomination for members of
     Assembly, &c.--informed me on his return home from that
     convention, that James Merril, Esq. urged some of that
     convention to place Samuel Young Esq. on their ticket, and
     offered one hundred _dollars_ if they would _go halves_ with
     Young's friends in the _ticket_ they should run at the then
     next election, for the purpose of defraying the expences of
     the election; and that the said Merrill took from his pocket
     the _hundred, dollars_, and laid it on the table for that
     purpose, as I understood it.--HENRY STAFFORD. _Saratoga
     Springs, March 1816_."

     "I, Joseph Ogden, of Malta in the county of Saratoga, do
     hereby certify; that I was at the inn of James Jones in
     Halfmoon, a few days after the election of 1815, and Aaron
     Morehouse of Ballston, and a leading federalist of Halfmoon
     were there, conversing together on the late election. Mr.
     Morehouse said he voted for Mr. Hamilton, the federal
     candidate, to get a federalist in his town to vote for Mr.
     Young; and the federal replied, that be voted for Mr. Young,
     and that it was the understanding among some of the
     federalists and _some_ of the republicans in Halfmoon, that
     the federals should vote for Mr. Young, and that the
     republicans should vote for Mr. Hamilton. Mr. Isaac Kellogg,
     jun. was present at the same time.--JOSEPH OGDEN."

     "I, Isaac Kellogg, Jun. of Malta in the county of Saratoga,
     do certify, that I was present and heard a part of the
     conversation above stated by Joseph Ogden, and remember
     hearing Mr. Morehouse state, that he voted for Mr. Hamilton,
     and the abovementioned federalist say that he voted for Mr.
     Young. I also heard another federalist of Halfmoon then
     present, say that he voted for Mr. Young also; and I
     distinctly understood from them, that there had been an
     understanding between the federalists and Mr. Young's
     friends, to support Mr. Young and Mr. Hamilton as members of
     Assembly.--ISAAC KELLOGG, jun."

It is also a fact, that Young's supporters did in two or three of the
towns _hide_ and _suppress_ the tickets printed by direction of the
county convention, for Mr. Cowen and the other candidates.

These certificates and these facts serve then to explain how Mr. Young
came by a greater number of _votes_ than Mr. Cowen;--and no doubt is
left on this subject when on calculating from the _returns_, you
perceive that the _votes_ for Mr. Young and Mr. Cowen in the aggregate
exceed by a great number the whole votes for any other candidate on
either side, and that _one_ of the federal candidates received a _less_
number of votes than the others. This would of itself shew as far as
the subject is susceptible of proof, a _bargain_ between _some_ of Mr.
Young's friends and _some_ of the federalists. Shortly after this
bargain which Mr. Roe speaks of, the McBain Meeting[4] was called,
where every exertion tended to produce a political abortion.

I cordially join with "the book" in censuring the editor of the Journal
for resembling this meeting to a political _funeral_;--for I do not
believe that the lifeless _embryo_ which it bro't forth, ever raised
the tho't of a _funeral_ in its poor _distracted father_. And while I
could not have the face to vindicate him from falsehood in not making a
better distinction, I should feel the less inclined to deny his being a
savage, while I behold him wantoning with the wounded feelings of a
forlorn, hopeless and unhappy _parent_. If his personification had
embraced the meeting merely, he ought to have known that even the
_dead_ are not always unavenged, and that its ghost at least, would
have arisen from the tomb to flutter round and haunt the unhappy county
of Saratoga on the eve of the next nomination, in the form of a _book_;
that thing which like the poet is justly admired for giving

              "To airy nothing,
  A local habitation and a name."

We could hardly say of that book, however, as Hamlet said of his
Father's ghost that

  "He would take his word for a thousand pounds"--

Or why do we hear it insisted that the fault of keeping alive discord
and division in the county, is imputable to a few individuals named and
pointed out by it?--Aside from the base and unprincipled attempts of
Roe, Thompson and some of their co-adjutors, to prostrate the only
_republican press_ in the county, by a system of slander and
detraction; The public cannot have forgotten that Mr Young's _famous_
colleagues were mildly and publicly invited to an amicable explanation,
which they refused and rendered the publication of affidavits necessary
in justification. The only reply which was received, was a still more
general, malignant and furious attack upon the press, not only from the
columns of the Schenectady Cabinet, but the foul lingo of Roe, Thompson
& co. with bitter complaints whenever that press either ridiculed their
folly and impertinence, or defended itself against their insidious and
secret attempts to effect its destruction.

Amongst other things in order to create a pretence for their _book_, it
will be recollected that judge Child has authorised the charge of
falsehood against the Journal in its maintaining that he had threatened
to get a new press into the county &c.--Indeed the judge appears to be
remarkably well pleased with that production, not only by his long
certificates, but by a letter which he afterwards wrote to the printer
of the _Courier_, recognizing its merits and trying to _divide with
federalists_ the honor of carrying clothes to the army;[5] which it
seems was given him by the _book_ in order to render his standing as a
certifier more conspicuous, by uniting on his broad brow, both the
_military_ and _civic_ wreath. How far the _denial_ of this mock
_Cincinnatus_ that he threatened as early as May to get a new press,
"_with all his blushing honors thick upon him_," will satisfy the
public, may in some measure he determined by the following certificate.

     "I hereby solemnly certify, that on the last of May or first
     of June last, when at the house of Judge Child, in a
     conversation relating to the Saratoga Journal, and the
     conduct of its Editor Mr. Isaiah Bunce, the said Judge then
     and there made use of the following expression to me, viz.
     'You must remember that the friends of Mr. Young, are not men
     of the _least property_, nor _least influence_ in the County,
     and Bunce may have _another press set up by his side_ in less
     than six months--That he [the said Judge] should withdraw his
     support from him, and said that it was best for every one to
     do the same, and then his press would fall of course.' And at
     the same time said, that he had rather _support the federal
     press at the Springs_ than the _Journal_. Shortly after this
     I informed Mr. Bunce of the above conversation at his
     office.'--JONATHAN WESTCOTT. _Milton, March 14th 1816_."

Young and Thompson made similar declarations of their intention to get
another press about the same time, with which they have been often
charged, and it seems thought best not to hazard a denial in the
book--therefore no other certificate but the one relating to Child's
has been procured--And the judge's conduct would have been more
christian-like, had he written a letter exculpating the editor of the
Journal from an undeserved odium cast upon him by his authority, than
thus to have given it confirmation and support, at the same time
knowing it to be _untrue_.

Of a piece with this however, appears to have been his previous conduct
about the time of his presiding over the _abortion_ at McBains. I
allude to his sending the history of that meeting with orders by
Thompson and Stillwell, to the editor of the Journal to print without
reading it.

     "I Lyman B. Langworthy, of the village of Ballston Spa, do
     certify to my fellow-citizens the following facts;--That on
     the night of the 20th April 1815, two days after the McBain
     meeting--being in the office of the Saratoga Journal late in
     the evening, James Thompson, James Merrill and Wm. Stillwell,
     Esqs. came into the room. Immediately after being seated, Mr.
     Thompson who acted as chief speaker, pompously displayed a
     fold of paper which he wished Mr. Bunce to print off in the
     form of Handbills by morning, it being then quite late. Mr.
     Bunce wished to see it and its contents.

     "Here Mr. Thompson to my astonishment flatly refused, unless
     Mr. B. would first promise on his word and honor that he
     would _positively_ and _unconditionally_ agree to print it
     _let it contain what it would_. This bro't on a long parley;
     Mr. Bunce wished to see it if for nothing more than to shew
     his workman its length, to learn from him whether it was
     possible to execute it in the time allowed. Mr. Thompson
     refused, and entered pretty lengthy into the subject, in his
     _precise roundabout_ manner: asserting that it was _none of
     his business what it contained_--that it was impertinent in a
     '_mechanic_' to ask his employers the use or destination of
     any work he should employ him to do; and frequently by way of
     a _salve_ interlarding his conversation with '_we do not wish
     you to do it for nothing Mr. Bunce, we have money enough_.'
     After much chaffering between the parties, judge Stillwell in
     a very candid manner, desired that the paper might be read,
     asking him if it _contained any thing they were ashamed of_.
     Mr. Thompson then looked to Mr. Merrill as for his opinion.
     Mr. Merrill said with some warmth, 'he shan't see it.' This
     brot' on considerable bickerings--crimination and
     re-crimination between Mess. Bunce, and Thompson, which judge
     Stillwell tho't rather indecorous, and quite earnestly
     rebuked the two gentlemen for their wrath, and at the same
     time said he thot' it high time to deliver judge Child's
     message. Here Mr. Thompson apparently supposing himself only
     entrusted with the charge, seemed not to understand.--After a
     great deal of argument, the paper at last had a 'first
     reading,' & was the proceedings of the McBain meeting, signed
     by Child, Thompson and Stillwell; and was delivered to Mr.
     Bunce, to shew his compositor, who was in bed. Mr. Bunce
     insisted that some of the gentlemen should deliver the
     message which judge Stillwell seemed to be so anxious about.
     Here the three gentlemen were thrown into great
     confusion--eyed each other as though each supposed the other
     ignorant of what he himself knew. Judge Stillwell's
     countenance seemed to labor with something which he was bound
     to reveal; and Mr. Thompson noting this, desired judge
     Stillwell _if he knew it to let it out_. Judge Stillwell then
     putting himself in an attitude corresponding, as he appeared
     to think, with the magnitude of the subject, began by saying
     that judge Child had instructed him to say to Mr. Bunce,
     _that he had always been a particular friend of his--had
     always given him all of his business--and should be sorry to
     withdraw it after the friendly intercourse which had
     subsisted between them--that it was the earnest desire of
     judge Child that Mr. Bunce should have the refusal of
     printing it; 'but as a last resort say to him from me, that
     if he refuses to print it as desired by Mr. Thompson, that I
     forever withdraw my patronage from his press.'_"

Here Mr. Bunce indignantly threw back the paper to Mr. Thompson, and
declared that under those circumstances he should not print it--saying
that after buffeting the storm of federalism, and the dark days of the
wars of our country, he little expected such treatment from one whose
duty it was to protect the press &c. &c.--and it was after much
persuasion, and partly through my own importunities, that he was
induced to print it.

     "Mr. Bunce's conduct through the whole transaction, which
     must have lasted two hours or more, was _consistent, firm_
     and _independent_ to my conception, as was the others
     _haughty_, _supercilious_ and _overbearing_.--Lyman B.
     Langworthy. _March, 1816_."

Here fellow citizens is the _iron club of power_ held over the head of
an editor of a _free press_, during an election--to coerce him and his
press into obedience to their dictates. What are we coming to when men
high in office use their offices, influence and patronage to control
the freedom of the press, which all the champions of freedom esteem the
organ and safeguard of our _liberties_--and attempt to compell it to
bend to their purposes--to sell itself and rush _blind fold_ on any
measure their interest or ambition may dictate?

The independent conduct of Mr. Bunce on this occasion was probably one
reason among _others_ why the judge aided in the introduction of
another printer of the more _pliant sort_; who would more readily bend
to his purposes and serve as a pipe with which his friends Roe,
Thompson, Stillwell &c. could spit their venom thro' the county in the
more permanent form of a _pamphlet_.

In this, with _three_ insolvent advertisements staring him in the face
from the _Independent American_, the judge denies, or sanctions a
denial, that he ever ordered an advertisement to be printed in that
paper _at all_. Unblushing impudence indeed!--Thus to ask the public to
pervert the eternal principles of truth and justice by giving credit to
such assertions as these.

The examination of a few more topics under this head shall
suffice.--Indeed amongst the disgusting details of falsehood and
meanness with which that production abounds; you find many remarks
imputed to the Journal which it never made, while those which it has
made, on examination will be found strictly true.

The writer of that pamphlet is guilty of falsehood in asserting that
the _editorial_ remarks of the Journal are not copied into other
papers. Not to mention others, they have been copied the year past in
several instances, by the _National Intelligencer_ at Washington, and
by _Niles' Weekly Register_ at Baltimore, two of the ablest papers in
the _Union_. The remarks which the book falsely calls a _scurrilous
attack_ upon the _Governor_, instead of being an attack on him, it so
happens that they were merely calculated to let the public know what
every republican had a right to expect, and which they in fact
_realized_ from our worthy chief magistrate in the season of peril
which dictated them.--They were such as he would himself approve, while
he would frown contemptuously on the _little fry_ who attempt so base a
slander in his name. Would to God the conduct of some of the governor's
fawning and pretended admirers could endure investigation like that of
this great and good man--the pride and ornament of his country!

As to the charge against the Journal for asserting that the first judge
and others had combined to domineer and rule the people of this county,
you already have a taste of the judge's fondness for domineering over
some of the people, and over their press; and that other persons named
have _acted_ in concert with him is equally true and notorious;--And it
is hardly necessary to enquire whether they combined for the purpose,
or instinctively assembled like birds of the same feather, from a
common spirit of domination. It is false, however, that the Journal
ever made such a charge. This and a number of these remarks are only
suffering them to wear a coat which they themselves have cut out of
whole cloth, and which seems to fit them so exactly. That paper never
charged Mr. Young with any management or compromise with the
federalists, further than what justly resulted from his being chosen
_supervisor_ in _Ballston_ by _federalists_, contrary to the _regular
town nomination_, and his afterwards being complimented by the federal
paper as a modern political _Luther_, on account of his having quit his
own party in that town and submitted to federal policy, not denied by
the _book_--from his having _aided_ in the election of the _federal
candidate for Congress_ in the fall of 1812; and from his "at least"
conniving at _federal aid_, in the spring of 1815--all of which are
facts of too general notoriety to be denied.

But the Journal did charge some of Mr. Young's friends with a
_political understanding_ between them and the federalists, which is
not only passed over in silence by the _book_, but proved by the
foregoing estimates and certificates.

On seeing Mr. Young supporting, and supported in his turn by a Senator
or Senators of this state for office, the Journal did ask the question,
whether it was pursuant to an _arrangement_ on the subject between
them? This question was put in the Journal directly to Mr.
Young--taking it for granted that Mr. Young has adopted the language in
the book on this question as his own, this might be received as an
_answer_, had not a mere _question_ been first perverted into a charge.

The Journal did also ask him the question, whether he intended to make
_one Joel Lee, clerk of this county?_ To which the book, replies that
he never promised any office to any man whatever. It is perhaps
necessary, in justice to the Editor of the Journal, to introduce the
following certificate, and leave this part of the subject without
farther comment.

     "I hereby certify, that shortly after the appointment of Wm.
     Stillwell, as a clerk, of this county, I was in the city of
     Albany, and conversed with Mr. Young on the subject of that
     appointment, in which conversation I expressed my surprise at
     his appointment, to which Mr. Young replied, it was not his
     fault, that there was a petition for him from some of the
     most respectable men in the county, and it would not do for
     him to oppose it, but that his mind was the strongest on
     _Joel Lee_ for that office.--ELI BEARDSLEE. _Milton, March
     1816_."

Among others to whom Lee admitted he had been promised of _offered_ the
Clerk's office by Young, is Mr. Nicholas Smith, but it is thought
unnecessary to multiply certificates on this head.

The writer of that pamphlet also displays his characteristic ignorance,
or stupid disregard to truth, when he says that the Journal ever
charged Young with receiving pay in three capacities, during the _extra
session_ of 1815. It never made the charge as it respected _that_, or
any other _year_;--but it so happens that during the _extra, session_
of 1814, Mr. Young did receive $5 per day, which was the pay for a
member of the house, and $2.25 per day, which was the _extra allowance_
on account of his being speaker. See New Revised Laws, Vol. I. p. 528,
and the act of April 18th 1815, called the _supply bill_, Sec. 15, by
which two acts, the wages of the Assembly are fixed at _$5_, and those
of the speaker at $7.25, and extended to the extra session of 1814.
Altho' the Journal _never_ made the charge imputed to it, yet you see
how easily and conclusively that charge might have been supported, had
the assertion ever been made.

With regard to Mr. Young's receiving the pay of a Col. he never was
charged with having done this during any _extra session_. That paper
did insinuate that he at one time as aid to the governor received that
pay. And it is hardly worth stopping to enquire whether he did or not,
so long as we have _his word_ that the Governor _offered_ it to him, in
consequence of which he _agreed_ to serve. Whether he got the _cash_
and gave a _receipt_ for it;--or it was absorbed in his _expences_;--or
laid it out to buy another press;--or yet _remains due_, is altogether
immaterial, so long as an answer is substantially made out to a
question raised by his _good friends_, and to which the public may
expect a reply: The following certificate is therefore given without
comment.

     "I certify, that a day or two previous to Samuel Young's
     accompanying his excellency the Governor to New-York, in
     conversation with Mr. Young at his house, he informed me that
     while he was at Albany, from where he had but just returned,
     he called on his excellency, who then informed him of his
     intended expedition to New-York, and pressed him, Mr. Young
     to accompany him; that he objected, and said that he should
     be much pleased with the jaunt, but his business was such, as
     to render it impossible; that the Governor urged him still
     stronger, and he replied that he was wholly unprepared for
     leaving home any length of time, and the Governor calculated
     to go the next day or day but one--that the Governor told him
     if he would accompany him, he would make him _an aid_ with
     the _pay_ of a _colonel_, and _bear his expences_, and that
     he would defer going until the next steam boat; that he
     wished to take time to consider the Governor's proposals as
     he informed the Governor--and soon after told him he would
     accompany him.--SETH C. BALDWIN, Junior. _Warren County,
     March 1816_."

The Journal never charged Young with having informed Merrill that he
"was not now Secretary, but should be to-morrow." At it again Merrill.
Will you certify that you did not give a friendly hint to a gentleman
who was going to Albany, that you had a connexion who would make an
excellent clerk in the Secretary's office, and request his name to be
given to Mr. Young, to whom Young replied, _I am not now Secretary but
shall be to-morrow_? I believe an intimation to this effect was given
in the Journal, which you blink with as much ingenuity as though you
had been bred in the same school with Mr. Young's colleagues. Amongst
the great number to whom Mr. Young _did give_ the information that he
was shortly to be Secretary, _you_, then it seems were omitted!

The facts disclosed in the following certificate, cannot fail to remind
one of the fable of the "Country maid, and her milk pail."

     "I hereby certify, that while riding in company with Samuel
     Young from Ballston to Albany, when going to the _winter
     session_ of 1815, the day before the legislature met, the
     said Young informed me that he expected to be Secretary of
     State when the republican council should be chosen; that he
     could be a member of the _legislature_ and _Secretary of
     State at the same time_, and _could reside at the Springs_ or
     Ballstown in the summer, and do the business of Secretary in
     Albany by Deputy, and that _these two_ offices would give him
     a _pretty good living_, or words to that effect.--JESUP
     RAYMOND. _Ballston, April 1816_."

"Green--let me consider; yes, green becomes my complexion best, and
green it shall be."

Mr. Kasson, was early spoken of by the _Independent American_ as an
applicant for the _Sheriff's office_, and as it appeals, was afterwards
a candidate for the county convention, and pledged to the support of
Mr. Young. In consequence of this, the Journal did ask the question to
Mr. Young, whether he intended Mr. Kasson as the Sheriff of this
county?--and nothing more. I think a farther inquiry was made whether
he was not authorised to purchase a "_mansion house_ for the _new
secretary_, in the village of Ballston Spa?" on which he preserves a
cautious silence.

It is remarkable in this and other instances, with what industry _The
Citizen_ manufactures assertions to suit his own purpose, and then
denies them. Having at length exhausted his fancy in fabricating,
shaping and denying particular charges, hardly one of which ever
existed, he ranges up his whole artillery of vengeance;--the battle
becomes general:--And the famous Doctor Slop, the man midwife, did not
pour a more copious and continued shower of curses upon Obadiah, who
had tied his bag of instruments with hard knots, than is thus suddenly
let fly upon the devoted head of the Editor of the Saratoga Journal.
"_Really_" said the Frenchman to an old woman who had been storming and
fretting at Napoleon, "the Emperor, my master would feel himself
infinitely grieved, if he knew how hard your _lady-ship_ thought of
him."

But it seems the Editor of the Journal "has indulged himself in a
course of low and vulgar sarcasms," tho' no particular instance is
pointed out. Thus the citizen, after sending his friend, Mr. Elias
Benedict, into the bar-room, to certify the _damns_ and _god damns_ of
Mr. Wilkins, suddenly becomes extremely modest and refined, and falls
to moralizing like Michael Cassio, after his _own_ drunken fit is over.
Mr. Bunce might really be esteemed far gone, had he reached the climax
of vulgarity which distinguishes the _citizen_ and his _book_.

But says the _book_ in another place, "the manners of Mr. Bunce are
_coarse and vulgar_." I suppose an immediate allusion is here intended
to the _manner_ in which he treated _Stillwell_ and _Thompson's_
supercilious proposition to agree to print their famous history of the
McBain Meeting, without reading it, under penalty of losing the first
Judge's patronage in case of a refusal. Perhaps they mean that he did
not on that occasion, turn out his toes exactly as he ought; or make a
becoming bow to so much mock consequence as surrounded them. I know not
in what language to describe their notions. We have already admitted
that Mr. Bunce does not pretend to vie in _purity_ of dialect with the
certificate of Mr. Elias Benedict. Suppose we also admit that he cannot
hold competition with Roe as a profound _linguist_--with Mr. Thompson
in _fairness_, _high mindedness_, _openness_ and _candor_--nor with Mr.
Linnendoll in belleslettres--and that he would not make so good a
_dancing master_ as Mr James Merrill[6] and leave the public to judge
whether coming short of these qualifications, he can be any way
tolerable in his person or polished in his conversation.

But 'tis said again, that he has presented some of our citizens "in the
ludicrous attitude of being in chase of one of the wheels of a
_political hack_." This plain farmer-like simile has given great
offence, and perhaps justly, to the high and refined notions of certain
book gentry; who have been too much in the habit of _hunting_ an
_office_, or _chasing_ a _dollar_, to believe that the idea of so
ordinary an occupation, could ever have been connected with that of
such _great men_ as themselves.

It may not be amiss to here remark, that Mr. Bunce was admitted an
Attorney of the Supreme Court in 1804; he settled in the village of
Salina in the county of Onondaga; shortly afterwards it was made a post
town, and he was appointed Post-Master[7] by the general government,
and continued in that office until he removed from that place. Soon
after his removal to Bridgewater, Oneida County, he was appointed
Post-Master at that place, and continued in that office until he
resigned on his removal to the county of Saratoga. During his residence
in the Western District, he attended with industry and fidelity to the
profession in which he was educated.

Soon after the declaration of war he concluded to quit the practice of
law, and purchased the establishment of the Republican press of this
county, and became the editor of the Journal.

Mr. Bunce has been a faithful, able, zealous and indefatigable
supporter and defender of our republican institutions, and of the
measures of our general and state government; and I confidently ask,
who ever accused him till this faction commenced their operations.
During the memorable campaign of 1814, he was not only vigilant and
faithful to our rights as an editor; but when danger threatened from
all quarters, he hired, equipped, and sent a common soldier into the
field for the defence of New-York.

Several who were active in introducing Mr. Bunce to the republicans of
this county, after finding him too independent to bend to their
"_particular_" views, and after he had rejected with disdain their
proffers to surrender to them his rights as an editor, they formed
themselves into a court of Inquisition, and ushered forth their courtly
mandates "Bunce must be sacrificed" "the Journal shall go down," even
this proscription extended to his family, and to his fireside; and so
eager were certain of these factionists, that they formed a plan to
break up his establishment by _force_, and actually threatened _to
scatter his types_. This fact is too susceptible of proof to be denied.

The republicans for a long time were silent spectators, while viewing
the persecution of their editor, and attack upon their own rights and
privileges; they fondly hoped, that time would cure the evil, and sober
reflection convince them of their error; but in this hope they were
disappointed, their persecutions encreased; and to them more certainly
to effect their object, and encouraged by the smiles of federalists,
they secretly brought a new printing press into the county--it was then
the designs of these men were more apparent--it was then the
republicans proclaimed their rights, and spoke to these "conspirators"
in language too loud not to be heard--too emphatic not to be
understood. And as long as these "conspirators" continue their press to
war against the rights and privileges of the people, Mr. Bunce as a
faithful centinel, will remain firm at his post. What though a gang of
office-holders should "in the mild spirit of Christian humility" (see
page 7 of the book) fulminate their maledictions against him; the
people will not be frightened into submission, nor the editor from his
duty.

But the Editor of the Journal has abused some of us, say they--Does the
_truth_ abuse them? does the _exposition_ of the _foulest combination_
that ever disgraced this or any other county, _constitute abuse_? Is
there such terrible majesty surrounding an _office_? No matter of what
_misrepresentations_ they are the authors of--No matter how _basely_
and _shamefully_ they have _belied and slandered their neighbors_--No
matter of what deception, hypocrisy and intrigue, they are guilty--No
matter how long they have conspired against the rights and privileges
of the people--No matter how unbecoming, gross and absurd their conduct
may have been; if an independent Editor, in vindicating the rights of
the people, and those of his own, questions the propriety of their
conduct; they immediately skulk behind their offices, and impudently
exclaim, "_touch us not--we are privileged_." 'Pigmies are Pigmies
still tho' perch'd on Alps.'

While I would not refrain from censuring the improper conduct of these
office _leaders_, I shall ever be ready to extend the hand of
fellowship to such as have been deluded by them--Nay, I would go
farther, let _them_ exhibit signs of repentance--let them evince a
determination to support our republican rights---let them cease to war
against the people, their editor, and individuals--let them remove
their _pensioned_ press--then shall they have my voice and my heart, to
intercede for them with an insulted and abused community.

But faint indeed is the hope of a reformation in _that_ man who
violates all honor, truth and decency. Who but the author[8] of that
book would charge the Milton committee, of being the tools of "fraud
and management?" Who but him would affix the charge of "miscreants" to
the republicans of Galway, Milton, Greenfield, Saratoga, Malta and
Ballston? Who but him would have the unblushing effrontery to publish,
"_that the general committee in nominating Mr. Cowen, instead of Mr.
Young, committed an OUTRAGE on the feelings and wishes of their
constituents_?" [see page 8. of that pamphlet.] Who but the author of
that pamphlet would--but I beg pardon--read the pamphlet itself, and
you have abundant evidence of the authors views, his principles, his
heart and his designs.

But the vengeful serpents of malice and persecution have not confined
their labors to _the book_, Early last spring, a thrust was made at the
Editor of the Journal, on the authority _it was said_ of Mr. Hackley,
late a member from Herkimer, who _(so Thompson said)_ had authorised
him to tell the people, that Mr. Bunce was unworthy of
confidence:--nay, to make use of a number of debasing epithets,--such
as would quadrate with the palate of Roe or Thompson, much better than
that of a gentleman like Mr. Hackley. But as this gentleman has
declined appearing in the book, and certainly never did, and never
would authorize Thompson to use his name for the vile purpose in which
he employed it, I barely glance at this circumstance as one article,
which would otherwise have been pressed into the Pandoras box which has
been so industriously served up for the public.

Instead of atoning by a mild, moderate and conciliatory course of
conduct, for the injuries attempted, not only against an individual,
but the public, in endeavoring to put down and destroy a free press;
the project is set on foot of introducing and palming upon the county
another press;--a child of their own;--a copartner in all their labors,
their joys and sorrows. It is however, _one thing_ to introduce a
press, and _another_ to get the _people_ to support it. While a few
malicious imps, hungering for revenge, were "_grinning horrible a
ghastly smile, to hear their famine should be filled_;" the people in a
number of different towns assembled, and freely expressed their
sentiments on the fatal tendency of such measures; and animadverted
with freedom and spirit on the motives which prompted them;--for which
the book printed by the printer of their paper, stigmatizes them with
the epithet of _miscreants_; and treats the whole of their labors as
mere _cant and slang_; I suppose it must mean compared with its own
dignified and masterly pages. _The majesty of the people_ is truly a
_monstrous Deity_ in the eye of venal and sell-created consequence. It
is merely for repeating _some of the sentiments expressed at these
meetings_, that the editor of the Journal is assailed as the
arch-disturber of our political repose.

_The Citizen_, in one place storms furiously at the allegation, that
the _Albany committee_ had advised them to remove their press. That
committee was appointed to inquire into the difficulties which agitated
the republican family in this county, and devise if possible the means
of removing them. Thompson as _chief cook_ of his own party, appeared
before them, with the book in his hand and Judge Child at his elbow _as
usual_; and I do believe the citizen from my very soul, when he says
they gave him no such advice. The committee were composed of _sensible_
men; and after listening to his incoherent display of folly and
nonsense on that occasion, it would be literally casting pearl before
_swine_, to have given them any advice on the subject.

Having established and considered some extraneous facts, for which I am
aware certain _gentlemen_ will not thank me especially as it may
disorder the thread of their own reasoning a little; I shall now
proceed briefly to consider the charge of FRAUD, FALSEHOOD, DUPLICITY
and CORRUPTION, as it appears in the book itself, on their own proof,
independent of the foregoing _memorandums_, leaving the memory of Mr.
Young's _colleagues_ and others at full leisure to be refreshed by
them.

That charge it will be recollected, is the turning point of the
controversy;--the _vox et preterea nihil_, which _boils, and foams, and
wheels_ thro' _the book_, like a torrent thro' the _Augean_ stable,
collecting in its course accretions of foulness and impurity. For this
purpose, Mr. _Bunce_ and Mr. _Palmer_ are represented as a political
_Archimedes_, controlling at their will the destinies of the
county;--dictating the number and sort and deliberations of the county
delegates, prostrating the Speaker of the house of assembly; and
dealing _havoc, spoil_ and _ruin_ around them. Mr. Cowen is represented
as their associate, aiming at his own elevation thro' the lowest arts
of cunning and duplicity. But fortunately for the cause of common
sense, the touch-stone of these mighty maggots of the brain are the
_facts_ on which they are founded. And here let us for a moment take
them as they stand among the certificate gentry, and examine their
actual bearings;--in doing which I shall still have occasion to mention
names, who, if they have finally not much cause for self gratulation,
must thank their good friend _the Citizen_ for bringing them before the
public.

The Motts[9] say, that on or about the 21st of March, Mr. _Cowen_ told
them that _Young_ was becoming _unpopular_;--that he had behaved
haughtily and disrespectfully towards his colleagues; and that a few
days before, he had been informed of this fact by several gentlemen to
whom they were referred. Now it will be recollected that Mr. Cowen and
John R. Mott were two of the _delegates_ from Saratoga, and as such
mutually bound to discuss with freedom the _allegation for and against_
Mr Young, or any other person who would be a candidate before the
general committee; and Mr. Cowen at this time _at least_, had no reason
to doubt the truth of what Young's colleagues had asserted. He also
mentioned it to James Mott, who was spoken of as a substitute in the
event of his brother's absence. It seems he also conversed freely with
these men on the subject of _his_ having consented to be considered a
candidate, and (so James Mott says) examined the probability of his
success, by calculating the favorable state of the delegation. But it
seems that communications to these _leaky gentlemen_ on the subject of
candidates are not to be made under any circumstances with impunity;
and Mr. Cowen is to be censured as _criminal_ for giving that
information, which it would have been _criminal_ to withhold. The only
way to make his act in this respect _criminal_ is by saying, "he ought
to have known that Young's colleagues had _lied_." But it will be
recollected that this was impossible, for the public did not know them
_then_ as well as it does _now_; nor had Mr. Cowen yet seen their
_certificate_ which is herewith published, by which they acknowledge
_what the book_ is so anxious for Mr. Cowen to have assumed. He did
afterwards see it, and then (so say the certificates) bore public
testimony to his opinion of the merits of Mr. Young, as well as
afterwards by letter to judge Child.

Thus does the charge of duplicity, made against Mr. Cowen, resolve
itself into a base attempt to fix upon him, what so snugly suits the
shoulders of others. It seems he finally bestows that justice upon a
_political adversary_, which the baseness and treachery of his
_colleagues_ and pretended friends had withheld. Am I acting the part
of an accuser towards those men? No. They have accused themselves. Why
are they again before the public? Had they hopes of skulking into
obscurity among the _motley_ multitude of certificates which throng the
folio of _the book_? or have they like one of the moral personages in
_Hudibras_, "_catch'd the itch on purpose to be scratch'd_?" It now
requires an eye less keen than that of a ministering spirit to pierce
the cob web veil which shields them from detection.

But in the process of this investigation, we are led to the
consideration of a subject "_too awful for irony_." The interested
certificates of these men are ushered to a Christian public, and a
higher sanction demanded for them, by the author, than he is willing to
allow to facts attested under the _solemnity_ of _an oath_. One could
hardly have anticipated this _atheistical_ appeal to the credulity of
the public, even tho' human nature were as vile and monstrous in
_others_, as it appears to be in _that author_. But perhaps there was a
necessity for it, in order to preserve the _dark_ uniformity of his
production. If, as has been asserted more than _one_ of his prominent
certifiers (among whom I would by no means rank these men) are
themselves _atheists_, what could he swear them upon?--Upon the
evangelists think you?--He might as well swear them on Payn's age of
reason, or his own vile book itself. Where they "believe that their
miserable bodies must take eternal refuge in the grave, and the last
puff of their nostrils will send their souls to annihilation, they
laugh at the solemnity of an oath and tell you that the grave into
which they sink as a log, forms an intrenchment against the throne of
God, and the vengeance of exasperated justice!" Such is the character
which the writer fixes upon _himself_.--Such is the character which
several of his _disciples_ sustain in public.

True, the falsity of an extra-judicial oath, carries with it no
_temporal_ punishment; but the _moral obligation_ remains to give it
validity. That _eternal reward or punishment_ which the _Citizen_ has
taken so much pains to blot out from the mind of his readers, will
still continue the delight and terror of the Christian, the eternal
fountain of his hopes and fears;--with him a sufficient motive to
truth, without the artificial and imperfect aid of _national law_. The
affidavits of four or five _credible witnesses_ were already before the
public, that Mr. Young's Colleagues did make a charge against him; but
it seems that every moral sanction must be trampled upon or trifled
with by the _Citizen_, to secure a triumph for his false and infidel
principles. He skips, like a grasshopper, over facts and premises and
propositions, and perches upon his pitiful assertions, which he wishes
the public to pervert into conclusions. Why did he not give these
affidavits lo the public?--He cannot surely complain that he forgot
them, for they appear to haunt his guilty imagination through the whole
of his progress; nor can he complain of wanting room. But the answer is
easy. He knew it would make his bait so very bad that even his own
gulls would not nibble.--

He was afraid of injuring his credit as an author even among his _own
sort_--for these affidavits prove conclusively and indubitably, that
not one jot nor tittle more was uttered against Mr. Young, than what
emanated from his own colleagues, in the course of the winter of 1814
and 1815.

It is still more remarkable so far forth as the charge of fraud is
concerned, with what logical precision _the Citizen_ pursues his
inquiry.--One is naturally led to expect from his _positive rant_,
nothing short of _point blank demonstration_ at least, that the fraud,
(which if there was any originated with Mr. Young's colleagues) had
produced the desired effect. That the attempt to cheat the people out
of this _mammoth legislator_,--this _sine qua non_ to their political
salvation, should have at least produced some influence with the men
upon whom it was exerted. Is there no _lost and wandering sheep_ ready
to return to the fold, and certify the delusions practised upon him by
these wolves in sheeps clothing? Even Mr. Thompson, whose attention is
apt to be otherwise directed, the moment he falls in conversation with
Palmer and Bunce, scents out the fraud with all the instinctive
keenness of a blood hound--Mr. Kasson on the same track, hardly the
length of a nose behind, and unwilling to be outdone in sagacity,
echoes the howlings of his leader. Judge Stillwell, tho' it seems the
dullest of the pack, follows hard and completes the choir; or in other
words Thompson and Kasson make a certificate that they _were not
deceived_, and Stillwell _endorses_ to give it a proper currency.

Even Mr. Roe lays claim to the same spirit of discernment, tho' his
title to that claim might be questionable on another _ground_. He is
readily led into a conclusion that Mr. Wilkins must have visited the
Northern towns to procure Mr. Cowen's nomination; when it happens that
the committees in those towns had been chosen before his name had been
mentioned in them as a candidate, and before he had consented to be
considered one. Mr. Roe had much better have satisfied himself by
consulting the northern delegation on this subject. He is remarkably
_alert_ to detect a _fraud_ where there is none, but is willing to take
any thing upon _tick_ which accommodates his good friend the _Citizen_.
He certifies that he could not be deceived by the poor stories of
Palmer and Bunce;--But believing the public to be greater numbsculls
than himself, imagines that he can trick them into a belief, that the
gentlemen who composed the northern delegation (among whom are many of
the most respectable names in the county) are the mere creatures of
another's will. It is perhaps fortunate that this man is an exception
to the general law of nature, that _like_ produces _like_, or he might
have made _tools_ of the whole county convention.

Who then was defrauded?--The Molts are by no means willing to admit
that this was the case with them. The Citizen cannot produce even one
poor certificate from any _one_ of the _county convention_, that they
were deceived or misled--neither Mr. Deake nor judge Child were of the
committee, and if they had been, they are both so good as to tell us
they were not gulled in that instance _at least_. John R. Mott, one of
the delegation from the town of Saratoga, according to his own
certificate had gone to New-York and sent Mr Olmstead who, with Mr.
_Cowen's consent_ (for it must have been by his consent that he acted
as a substitute) sat in convention, and voted for Mr. Young. Thus
ingeniously does the citizen rummage the chain of cause and effect, to
eke out his favorite conclusion.

But stop, I confess I had like to have forgotten the certificate of Dr.
Child (Increase W. Child) a son of judge Child, one of the most
distinguished among the _dramatis personæ_ who figure in the book!--He
does go the length of saying, that he voted on the strength of Mr.
Bunce's representation. Voted for whom? For Mr. Cowen? O no.--But he
voted for a _committee_, who were to meet a _committee_, to make out
the _county nomination_!--And shocking to relate, poor Dr. Child was
galled into a vote for three of the most respectable men in the town of
Milton!!--viz: Daniel Couch jun. Esq. Joel Keeler Esq. late a member of
the legislature, and Thomas Palmer Esq!!!--It is derogatory to no man
in that town, to say that a more respectable delegation could not have
been procured. And what is more shameful still, one of those gentlemen,
viz: Daniel Couch jun Esq. whom the Doctor had thus honestly sent _to
vote for Mr. Cowen_, actually deceived his constituent, and _voted for
Mr. Young_!!!!--Doctor Guild's certificate is very happily illustrated
by the burlesque syllogism; _that Moses was the meekest man:--Solomon
was the wisest man;--And therefore St. Paul was ship wrecked_. The
conclusion of a fraudulent nomination, follows about as direct upon Dr.
Child's premises, as the shipwreck of St. Paul did upon the meekness of
Moses or the wisdom of Solomon. We should be almost led to suspect from
this specimen, that the Doctor is a greater _infant in politics_, than
in _dissection_.

This famous pamphleteer is by no means more fortunate, when he
approaches the topic of the McBain meeting. The materials of which this
meeting was composed are now known as far as the book, which has kindly
given their names to the public. It consisted of one _first judge_. One
_Sheriff_ and one _Clerk_, appointed under the administration of
_Samuel Young_ Esq.--_George Palmer_ Esq. Master in Chancery, As't.
Justice, Justice of the peace, Post Master, &c, and whom _the book_
holds out as the _expectant_ of the _Surrogates office_--_Roe_ deputy
Sheriff and _ci-devant_ constable--_James Mutt_--_James Thompson_ Esq.
who had kindly volunteered, as early as the 1st of April, to take the
interests of the county under his charge as _public prosecutor_ and
_States evidence_--_Alpheus Goodrich Esq. his partner_--Doctor _Nathan
Thompson_ his brother--Mr _Elias Benedict_ his client;--the one willing
to _receive_, and the other to _pay_ in certificates of the most
current stamp--_A justice or justices_ from Ballston, who knew their
political God-father--Dr. _Samuel Pitkin_, who acted as minister
plenipotentiary from _Milton_ to _Saratoga_, making thirteen, who it is
admitted, were from all the different towns enumerated in the caption
of the meeting viz: Ballston, Stillwater, Galway, Saratoga, Greenfield
and Milton. Add to these some others of minor note, and you make, as
the Citizen would have it, the number of 21 _or more_. The Citizen too
tells us he was there; but whether in the character of ---- ---- or
---- we are left to grope in the gloom of conjecture.

Such was the formidable _Areopagus_ convened to purify the _body
politic_; to correct the poor misguided county convention;--and guard
the people against _being their own worst enemies_; such was the
assembly presented to the public as a _numerous and respectable_
meeting from 6 towns out of 14 (judge Child and Dr. Thompson kindly
representing the towns of _Greenfield_ and _Galway_.)

No sooner had this _numerous meeting_ assembled, than it was tho't
necessary to divide them into the proper committees;--This being more
_genteel_ and _parliamentary_ than to act in a body;--Accordingly
_Stillwell, Thompson and Palmer_ were created a committee to draw up
the proceedings of the meeting; _Child_ and _Stillwell_, a committee of
_Logic_ and _Rhetoric_, to call on _absent friends_ and get them to
consent that he _should resign. Mott_ and _Child acted_ as a _committee
of vigilance_ to pick up and report scraps of conversations and letters
from Mr. Gowen after the meeting was over. _Mott, Thompson, Kasson,
Stillwell, Roe,_ &c acted as a committee to report to the county, the
fraud which had deprived _Mr Young_ of his undoubted right to go to the
Legislature, whether the people were _willing_ or _not_. Mr. Elias
Benedict to draw up the proceedings of _Mr. Wilkins_ and _possibly_ to
enforce the statute for the suppression of Vice and Immorality;--and
committee of the whole to tell the county they had been there; and do
away the strange reports which had gone abroad, that they were a little
self-created body, without _precedent, authority or premises_,
resembling what saucy people would call a _faction_.

All might yet have gone well, had not _Stillwell_ been such a miserable
_slouch_ at telling a story. It appears that Stillwell and Palmer had
written a history of the meeting for publication, in which _Mr. Cowen_
tells the meeting, "that _they_ must be responsible if they act without
his absolute resignation." See p. 24 and 5. This presumptuous act
throws the Citizen into a whirlwind of passion; and he falls a _cursing
like a very drab_, at _Palmer, Bunce and Cowen_, apparently not
believing that his _friend Stillwell_ would ever have told so dangerous
a _truth_. He calls it a _farrago of nonsense_, after having before
asserted that _Palmer as Secretary_ had nothing to do with it; that it
belonged exclusively to the _committee of publication;_ and _then_
recollecting that Palmer and Stillwell were a majority of that
_committee_, and consequently the _proper authority_, he takes another
leap, and says, that the _rough draft_ of the _proceedings_ were given
to _James Thompson Esq_ for wham he claims the _copy right_.

Now altho' _Thompson_ is unwilling to be outdone in telling a story,
and tho' he had peaceable and quiet possession according to _the book_
of the _consciences_ of _Stillwell and Child_, instead of telling the
public that _Mr. Cowen had resigned_, he says something which to be
sure would look "_like that_," _as the citizen says_, upon the first
impression; but which on being critically examined, contradicts the
fact on the face of it. Even the compound of jargon and inconsistency
drawn up by Thompson, and published in page 16 of the book, could not
be tortured into an _unconditional resignation_. Mr. Cowen is there
made to say, not that he _resigned_ nomination;--But that for reasons
there enumerated, "it was his _personal wish to resign his own
nomination_ &c. and he submitted to the decision of the meeting, the
question whether it would be most expedient to act on his _resignation
which_ he now made (_which_ must refer to the _personal wish_ before
expressed, for no other resignation is pretended) if the meeting should
judge a postponement impracticable, or to postpone acting until he
could have time to communicate to some of the particular friends of his
nomination (beside those who were present at the meeting) his reasons
for resigning, and procure their concurrence _before hand_ &c."

Mr Cowen thus makes the concurrence of his friends _before hand_ a
_condition precedent_;--but the meeting disregard it--reject the
condition, and gravely resolve to accept _a resignation_, which had not
yet been tendered to them. Such is the rickety production which came
straggling before the public in search of the Secretary, who had
refused it the sanction of his name. In order to remedy this evil, and
"_throw it into form_" as the citizen would say, _his_ name gives place
to that of _Thompson and Stillwell_, who it is agreed are _larger_ men
than the Secretary,[10] and must therefore carry greater weight. Even
the certificate which follows, signed by nearly the whole of the
meeting, after going on to say that Mr. Cowen openly and publicly
resigned, immediately defeats itself by referring back to, and adopting
the statement drawn up by Thompson as a _candid, fair and faithful
statement of facts_;--and it is evident that such part of the
certificate as overshoots the premises upon which it is professedly
founded, must mean nothing more than to give a _construction_ advocated
by the Citizen, and which they esteem so necessary for their defence.
The certificate of Peters, Stewart and How, shew the miserable shifts
to which the Citizen and his friends were driven in order to bear
themselves out in their conduct. They are perhaps excusable so long as
they keep to the question of _construction_; but when they tax the zeal
of their friends with certificates and declarations so far beyond what
they themselves are willing to say--nay, which actually _contradict_
the certificates and declarations that precede them, one is almost
induced to overlook the difficulties of their defence, and to suspect
the moral honesty--not of these men; but of those who have drawn them
into this singular situation.

After all this round of certifying and reasoning, the shoe still
continues to pinch, and the first Judge again appears before the public
to help the defect. Altho' he signed Thompson's statement in which he
is careful to make use of the language employed by it, and the epithet
_personal_ when he speaks of Mr. Cowen's language, yet when he
afterwards hears of a distinction between _personally_ and _absolutely_
he seems almost struck dumb with astonishment, and says he had never
heard of the distinction before. Now altho' the public will make all
rational allowance for the judge's want of distinction where Mr.
Thompson is concerned, yet I suspect they could hardly account for his
present lack of apprehension, unless he took that statement upon tick,
and signed without reading it.

Still despairing of any thing like a defence upon this ground, the
Citizen at length, p. 24, dismisses his whole train of statements,
certificates and letters, & undertakes very learnedly and elaborately
to refine upon the distinction; and insists that if a man expresses his
_personal wish to resign_, it is to all intents and purposes a
_resignation_, and that no other was ever heard of; as if it was
impossible to consult the opinions of others, and make a _general
resignation_ depend upon their consent. All that it seems necessary in
that case, is for the McBain meeting to resolve to accept what they
thus are pleased to call a resignation, and nominate another candidate.
And this it seems accords with the sense of all the world on the
subject, both federal and republican. Thus the world are at length
after a lapse of ages, furnished with an easy recipe for a
resignation--a sort of _panacea_ to correct all the sores of the body
politic and produce a "_speedy composure of the public mind" "Tereatis
Risum Amici_;" and call no one a political quack playing off his
whimsical nostrums upon the people, whose mental repose lies so near
his heart. If the meeting are told that they _shall be responsible if
they act on a declaration thus limited_, keep it out of view as much as
possible, or say as the citizen does, p. 40, that it was only something
_like that_ or _out of season_, or some such thing. If a committee of
_three_ are chosen to publish the proceedings and _two_ of them write a
_farrago of nonsense_ which puts the whole together by the ears, in
order to decide the quarrel and "_speedily compose the public mind_,"
let them raffle upon the question, and to see that every thing is fair,
appoint the _First Judge_ to hold the hat. Ancient history tells us of
more important controversies than this, decided in the same way;

  Old Hector was a wary chap,
  At pitch and chuck and hustle-cap,
  An old Scotch bonnet quickly takes,
  In which he three brass farthings shakes;
  Then turn'd his head without deceit,

  To shew them that he scorn'd to cheat;
  And cries aloud, here goes, my boy,
  'Tis _heads_ for Greece and _tails_ for Troy;
  Then turns the cap: _great Troy_ prevails,
  _Two farthings_ out of three were tails.

But it is time to lift the curtain, and attend more minutely to the
_chief jugglers_ who figure behind it. _The Sheriff and others_, who
sign the McBain certificate, alledge that Mr. Cowen (_according to
their construction_) not only _resigned his nomination_ but _did so_
without any previous _request (as they perceived)_ It would seem from
_this_, that these men were kept as a sort of _puppets_ to dance in
accordance with the wires which actuated them, from behind the scene;
being thus, _according to their own account_, strangers to the
_pressing request_ made to Mr. Cowen, and the _arguments_ by which it
was enforced. They are excluded the main _performance_ and reserved for
the _farce_--probably for the _wisest_ of reasons, as there are certain
important parts which would be ruined in _vulgar hands_. It is time
that these men _should perceive_, if they have _not yet learned_ one
important fact among others, which their famous masters, _Thompson and
Child_, have thus hypocritically concealed throughout. For this purpose
I give the following extract of a _letter_ from Judge Child, written on
the subject of that _meeting_, the day after it took place, dated at
Greenfield, April 19, 1815:

     "We accordingly met, and had a free candid and friendly
     _consultation_ with _Mr. Cowen_; and when he came to hear the
     _communication from Esquire Cowles, Ketchum and Gardner_, on
     the subject of Mr. Young's _conduct_ and _usefulness_ in the
     Legislature;--_and taking into consideration all the
     circumstances_, he cheerfully declared that, _in his
     judgement_, it was best for him to resign being a candidate;
     and use his influence for the election of Mr. Young;--but
     that he _really desired_ an opportunity of _consulting those
     friends_ who had exerted themselves to procure his
     nomination, that were not present. It was stated to him that
     they lived or at least _some_ of them, at such a distance,
     that it would be very difficult to give seasonable
     information to the county of his _resignation_ in favor of Mr
     Young, should it be put bye till Thursday or Friday as he
     requested;--and that the same _reasons_[11] _which convinced
     him that it would be proper for him to resign, would satisfy
     them on the subject_. Mr. Cowen _still_ tho't it would be
     _the best way to proceed_ and the most gratifying to his
     feelings, _to take time to consult his friends_."

Thus you see Mr. Cowen was requested to resign, and the _arguments_ in
favor of that resignation founded upon the _famous certificate_, dated
Albany, April 17, 1815, published Ante, page 4--a statement
_jesuitically_ calculated to shew that the zeal of his friends had, _by
perverting the conversation of Ketchum &c._ aided in procuring _his_
nomination. And when he expresses a _desire_ to consult his friends;
_an answer_ is ready, emanating from the same false and deceptive
source. Thus are the most _shameful arts_ employed to destroy his
_confidence in those friends_, and induce in him a reluctance _under
all the circumstances_ (as the first judge expresses it) against being
a candidate--You thus see their _rotten certificate_ made the
foundation for the _rise_--_progress_ and _result_ of that _meeting_.
Thus does the charge of DUPLICITY, FRAUD and FALSEHOOD recoil upon the
heads of those _arch-certifiers_, or _the men_ employed in _obtaining_
and _giving currency_ to their shameful communication.

It then in fact ceases to be a question what was _said_ or _done_ by
that meeting, or any member of it. For according to every principle of
reasoning, _divine_ or _human_; if the _whole_ was grounded on _fraud_,
the whole was a _nullity_, and possessed no _moral force_. "If" says
the book, "Mr. Cowen's _nomination_ was procured _by fraud_, it cannot
be called a _nomination_; and may be departed from with impunity." It
turning out on investigation, that his _nomination_ was a _perfectly
fair one_, and his pretended _resignation_ founded on the _grossest
duplicity_;--whether it was _conditional_ or _absolute_, whether it was
_personal_ or _general_, it is void, and unworthy the name of a
_resignation_. _Eternal justice_ disavows it; _Political justice_
disowns it; and _common sense_ condemns the perversion. The
_nomination_ of _Mr. Young_, by a meeting thus _packed_ for the
purpose, by a few of _his friends_, was not only _void_ for that
reason, but it had its origin in the _same duplicity_, and was
therefore equally void with _every thing founded upon it_.

Were Young's colleagues correctly informed, as to the manner _their
conversations_ were spoken of? or were they deceived by _Kasson_ and
_Thompson_ when they called for their _certificates_ at Albany? If the
_latter_, they had near one year before giving their _second_
certificate, to correct the error. Why have they always shrunk from
investigation? Why in their _second_ certificate, contradict the
_first_? Why after having _near a year_ to _prepare_ it, does their
_second_ certificate _contradict itself_? As they now stand, they
present a more shocking _caricature_ of folly and inconsistency, than
ever _figured_ before the public. They have burst the bands of
political faith--They have melted the cement of affection, and driven
to a returnless distance, the best and dearest of friends. No man knew
what to say or think of what they said or certified--Individual ruin is
threatened, and the destruction of a _free press_ aimed at; while in
the political atmosphere all is uproar, disorder and confusion.

  --Alas.--"That _men_,
  Clothed with a little _brief authority_,
  Should play such antic tricks before high heaven,
  As make the angels weep!"

With these men however I have now done--But let their _Pander_ beware;
let him _pause and reflect_, ere it be too late--"Already are the
sluices of public indignation opened upon him--Already is he _drifted
along on the surface of the stream, the object of_ CONTAGION and
ABOMINATION"--AN ELECTOR. MAY 1816.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE: The public will duly _appreciate_ the reasons for _postponing_
the publication of the foregoing till _after Election_. The writer
hopes he has avoided the example of the _Citizen_, by not _descending_
to the retreats of _private_ character.--Even the author of the book
has not been named. The character given of that author, ante page 30 in
note, is not intended to apply to any one named in that
pamphlet.--Indeed I hope for the honor of human nature, that however
_strange_ and _inconsistently_ some of these men have acted who have in
that production given their names to the public, yet that none of them
are so far gone as to prostitute themselves to the vile purpose of
writing such a work as that in which their names are interlarded.




NOTES

[1]  _Several hundred of these certificates were a day or two after the
McBain Meeting, struck off at the FEDERAL Printing' Office in this
Village, and circulated thro' the County during the election_.

[2] _It will be recollected that the writer of this letter is the
famous conversation-monger, who together with his brother James Mott,
are made the instruments of proving duplicity in Mr. Cowen. John R.
Mott pretends that as early as the 1st of March, Mr. Cowen told him
that Palmer and Bunce were opposed to Young, &c and yet on the 6th day
of_ April _following, he very gravely informs Mr. Cowen by letter, of
the very facts which he says Mr. Cowen had told him before. This is the
man too who tells so much about_ private _conversation, and Mr.
Cowen's_ hesitating _to tell him names; and enjoining him to_ secresy,
_and who so very spunkily says that he called Gen. Dunning "a fool."
Mr. Cowen must, I think, feel himself greatly indebted to these_
brother _certifiers for their honor and patriotism. This too is the
man, who sometime before wrote a fawning letter, asking Mr. Cowen to
give him an office (Assistant Assessor of the U.S.) which he had at his
disposal; to which Mr. Cowen readily acceded, and afterwards on another
written request, conferred the same office on his_ brother certifier
_James Mott. [The inhabitants of Halfmoon, will furnish ample
credentials, for their extraordinary_ attention _and_ correctness _in
the execution of their offices, One of these men shortly before the
election was appointed deputy to the Sheriff: He suddenly veers about
and becomes a convert to_ court _doctrine, and evinces his zeal in the
new cause he had espoused, by his_ anathemas _against his former
friends.] These brothers in blood, in politics and in virtue,
generously avail themselves of the advantages afforded them by official
intercourse with Mr. Cowen on business, and then patriotically tender
the fruits of their_ rotten-hearted _labor to_ "the citizen" _and his
friends as proofs of duplicity_.

[3] _This was on the_ first _day of the Polls--but it seems by Mr.
Bennet's certificate, that as soon as the election was over, Thompson
flung off the mask, and exhibited his_ cloven foot _without reserve_.

[4] _Altho' it is a fact well known that this meeting was projected by,
and the canting pretences which bro't it together and sent forth the
strange account which it gives of itself, originated with_ two or three
"demagogues," _yet it is a subject of real regret that a_ few honest
men _have suffered themselves to be duped by their shameful artifices.
It commenced with_ Mr. Thompson of Milton, _who during the summer past
has been very industrious in serving up and peddling little doses of
slander against_ Mr. Baldwin, Mr. Bunce, and others. _This man has been
a real political_ scold, _ever since he found himself capable of
throwing a little confusion into the ranks of the county; He is the
first_ male Xantippe _who has reduced the doctrine of scolding to a
system, and certified it in a_ book. _Of such characters there is
little hopes:_

  "_Destroy his_ web and sophistry _in vain_,
  _The creature's at his_ dirty work _again_."

[5] _Altho' no man more sincerely rejoices in the charitable donations
of the people of Saratoga, for the relief of our brethren at_ Sacket's
Harbor, _than the writer of these remarks, yet he cannot avoid joining
in the general disgust at the vanity of Judge Child, in trying to
elicit public applause for himself. The judge cannot bear to hide his
charming light under a bushel. Instead of not suffering one hand to
know what the other is doing, he is not content with its being
published in a_ book, _but advertises his charity in a newspaper as a
man would one of his_ stray cattle. _From his liberal conduct to the
Editor of the Journal and others, he is perhaps excusable in calling
his charity about him as soon as possible, even if he offers a
considerable reward for it in the next advertisement which he puts into
his darling paper_.

[6] By a new species of logic adopted by the author of the Book, a man
is accounted _honorable_ and _virtuous_ by the square foot of carcase.
Ergo, "a little man" in stature, comprehends all that is _hypocritical_
and _wicked_. The _great man_, James Merrill, who is the subject of
this note, by the above rule is of course, the most _honorable_, best
informed and _religious_ man of the whole group, who embellish the fair
pages of that "book." It is proper that the public should know a little
of his _debut_ and _denoument_ as a political character.

His _first_ notorious feat was performed in his first and last
appearance as a member of assembly, where his colleague by a friendly
rap on the knuckle convinced him that he was _endeavoring_ to read off
a _federal_ vote for a council of appointment, which a federal member
had assured him was more _legible_ than the one _prepared_ for him.

The _second_ time as a quid of the _Burr_ stamp, and willing to spend
500 dollars rather than the republican candidate should succeed.

The _third_ time in a _new_ character; with his name blazoned in large
capitals in recommendation of S. Van Rensselaer for governor, in
opposition to Daniel D. Tompkins in 1813.

The fourth time in 1815, as the _sub_ agent and director of the McBain
meeting; still ready with 100 dollars, to divide the ticket with the
federalists rather than the regular nomination should succeed and Mr.
Young not be elected; swearing he had not _before taken hold since his
friend Burr went down_.

On the _first_ day of election he is a flaming democrat.

On the _second_ day, at the opening of the polls, he makes public
proclamation "for all those who did not intend to vote for Mr Young to
come forward and state their reasons, _and they should be heard_; and
that _now_ he had no objections that _three federalists_ should be
elected."

On the third day of the election, "_it depended on a word, and the
types of the republican printer would be scattered_." A true sample of
"the mild spirit of Christian humility" Vid. _book_.

[7] _This circumstance would not have been mentioned had not the
_CITIZEN_ boasted of the same office confering great honor on one of
his disciples_.

[8] In treating of the productions of an author, it is customary to
give some account of his character, pursuits, &c. &c. This is usually
done by way of _introduction_ or _appendix_. I beg leave in this
instance to deviate from the regular method, and present him in the
more appropriate station of a _Nota Bene_.

The author of that pamphlet is a _lawyer_ in _practice_ and a
_moralist_ by _profession_; by the former, he has acquired great
_booty_; by the latter a ---- and what is peculiar to himself (and all
'peculiar' men have their peculiarities) he never suffers his
_profession_ to interfere with his _practice_; and yet in _money
concerns_, he has been known to handle _both_, with great _adroitness_.
In his _practice_ his fellow townsmen are "pine plains men," in his
profession "a contemptible rabble;" and truly so, for the former tell
him "the farm you live on was once the soil of a revolutionary
soldier." This is truly saucey, for he acquired it by his _practice_.
The latter tell him, "you sued us for small sums due the estate of a
relative; you made us ten times more costs than the demands--you took
advantage of a then existing law, to oppress us; you feasted on our
misfortunes, and rioted on our distresses; till an _ugly_ law extended
relief to the '_rabble_'."

One of these men living in an adjoining town, tells him, "I once owned
two farms; I own no farms now--They are swallowed up in '_morality_.'"
It is not yet ascertained, whether his rate of 40 per cent interest, is
regulated by his _practice_ or his _profession_. It certainly cannot
be, as has been supposed, in proportion to the wants of the distressed.
I am inclined to think his _morality_ often runs ahead of his
_practice_, in this case.

A _good reputation_ is not common to all men. Our author has
practically demonstrated the truth of this position, and conclusively
shewn, that the _needy_ have an absolute right to filch a supply from
their neighbor; and has exhibited such powerful proofs in support of
_his_ claims, that he has actually obtained more than a _quantum
sufficit_, and conferred the surplus on some of his _needy_ friends.

The misfortunes of his neighbor, forms the chief round in his _ladder_
to eminence; it rests on the sanctuary of domestic afflictions, and is
supported by the tears of the widow and the orphan. Lo! Avarice claims
him for her own--Billingsgate yields her choicest flowers--Envy
entwines the glowing wreath--and malice triumphantly crowns him "lord
of the ascendant."

[9] _The certificates of these men interlard several points of
conversation as minute as the souls which gave operation to their
memory; and which appear to be designed to answer no other purpose,
than to shew the extraordinary strength and accuracy of intellect by
which they are characterized. Their fixed attention to such matters may
serve as some excuse for the manner in which they executed their
offices of U.S. assessors. But I have had occasion to note these
gentlemen once before_.

[10] _The Citizen is perhaps correct when he calls Mr. Palmer a_ little
man, _and Judges of his own_ favorites _by the quantity of_ matter
_instead of_ mind;--_Like the Italian Farmer in estimating the
qualities of a_ grave animal _no less famous for_ strength and dullness
_than for the_ length _of his_ ears.

[11] _It seems that an effort was afterwards made to convince their
friends, by publishing several hundreds of the famous communication
from Young's colleagues, notwithstanding an express stipulation to the
contrary_.






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A REVIEW AND EXPOSITION, OF THE FALSEHOODS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS, OF A PAMPHLET ADDRESSED TO THE REPUBLICANS OF THE COUNTY OF SARATOGA, SIGNED, "A CITIZEN" ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

