Produced from page scans provided by Cornell University.






{115}

The American Missionary

  *     *     *     *     *

Vol. XLII. May, 1888. No. 5.

  *     *     *     *     *

CONTENTS

  EDITORIAL.
       FINANCIAL
       PARAGRAPHS
       THE VERNACULAR IN INDIAN SCHOOLS
       THE TIME FACTOR IN THE SOUTHERN PROBLEM. By Rev. A.H.
         Bradford, D.D.
  THE SOUTH.
       SOUTHERN TESTIMONY
       OUR WORK AS A GRADUATE OF FISK UNIVERSITY SEES IT
       A PASTOR'S FIRST VIEW
       TALLADEGA FRUIT
       THREE PICTURES FROM LE MOYNE SCHOOL
       THE EVANGELIST AT WORK
  THE CHINESE.
       LETTER FROM REV. W.C. POND
       FOUR MONTHS OF EVANGELISTIC WORK
       CHIN GAING IN CHINA
  BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.
       SPARE OUR TEACHERS
  RECEIPTS

  *     *     *     *     *

New York.
Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance. Published by the American
Missionary Association.
Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.
Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

  *     *     *     *     *

{116}

AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  *     *     *     *     *

PRESIDENT,

------ ------

_Vice-Presidents._

Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.

Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.

Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.

Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.

Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.

_Corresponding Secretaries._

Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

_Treasurer._

H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

_Auditors._

PETER MCCARTEE.

CHAS. P. PEIRCE.

_Executive Committee._

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.

ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.

_For Three Years._

LYMAN ABBOTT,

A.S. BARNES,[1]

J.R. DANFORTH,

CLINTON B. FISK,

ADDISON P. FOSTER,

_For Two Years._

S.B. HALLIDAY,

SAMUEL HOLMES,

SAMUEL S. MARPLES,

CHARLES L. MEAD,

ELBERT B. MONROE,

_For One Year._

J.E. RANKIN,

WM. H. WARD,

J.W. COOPER,

JOHN H. WASHBURN,

EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

_District Secretaries._

Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston._

Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D., 151 _Washington Street, Chicago_.

_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON,

_Secretary of Woman's Work._

Miss D.E. EMERSON, 56 _Reade Street, N.Y._

  *     *     *     *     *

  COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to
the Editor, at the New York Office.

  DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A
payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

  FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

  *     *     *     *     *

{117}

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  *     *     *     *     *

                     Vol. XLII. May, 1888. No. 5.

  *     *     *     *     *

 American Missionary Association.

  *     *     *     *     *

Six months of our fiscal year have come to a close. It may be of
interest to our readers to know how our treasury compares with the
same period of time last year. During this half-year, there has been
an increase in _collections_ of $6,250.73, a decrease in the amount
paid in from _estates_ and _legacies_ of $2,880.05, making a balance
in the total receipts, of $3,370.68 in advance of those of the
preceding year for the corresponding period.

This, however, does not mean that we are in advance of our
expenditures. All life predicates growth. When there is no growth, the
body has begun to die. Those who will read the able paper of Dr.
Bradford in this magazine, will doubtless conclude with him, that the
imperative demand is for increased life, and for multiplied efforts to
save those to whom Providence has manifestly called us. The natural
and necessary growth of life has been upon us. While we have cut and
trimmed and pinched with an economy that the most careful might think
an unwise policy, there has yet been growth. Success necessitates
development. Good schools will enlarge. One church creates another.
One foothold secured in a missionary region opens districts to many
who swell the cry of need to the heart of Christian compassion "_come
over and help us_," so that with all our pruning the work has grown
beyond the slight increase of funds from our churches.

We ought to push our work. Ignorant millions need the truth which we
have. They need the knowledge which we have. They need salvation, and
if we have it and have the spirit of Christ's compassion, we will see
that they are not left in darkness. There is enough and to spare in
the hands of the disciples of Christ for this vast and increasingly
urgent work. "Why," says George W. Cable, "if you knew the national
value of this work, to say nothing of its gospel value, you would
quadruplicate it before the year is out," He calls it "the most
prolific missionary field that was ever opened to any Christian
people," "right here at your doors."
{118}

While then we have the right to thank God and his people, and reason
to take courage, we should be false to the churches and to ourselves
should we fail to accentuate the necessities of our work, and the
demand upon those in whose name we stand. Brethren, is not ours the
appeal of Christ to you for his neglected and his needy ones? Bring
your thank offerings to God and make enlargement for this enlarging
work.

  *     *     *     *     *

We are thankful for our receipts from legacies. They are testimonies
that speak, from those whose lips are sealed in death, for the gospel
of Christ and its elevating and saving power when it is applied to the
low-down and the poor and the wronged. In these legacies, those who
are dead yet speak the word of life to those whom they have
remembered.

Our work, however, should be planned, not upon the uncertainties of
legacies, but upon the ability and faith of those who live and give.
It cheers us to know that our living donors are increasing and are
entering with us the doors of opportunity which God has so manifestly
opened and which no man can shut.

  *     *     *     *     *

We congratulate the American Home Missionary Society that it closes
its year, not having realized its fears even if it has not absolutely
compassed all its hopes. We are grateful, for its success. Our
congratulations also are hearty that our great Foreign Missionary
Society, the A.B.C.F.M., reports itself at the end of its fiscal
half-year $78,000 in advance of what was received for the same period
last year.

  *     *     *     *     *

But do not forget the great work which the churches have put upon us.
See nearly eight millions who went from barbarism into slavery, and
from slavery came out the poorest of the poor, the most ignorant of
the ignorant, the most dependent of the dependent, without true
religion and with no opportunity to know what true religion is unless
we tell them. Africa is in America, China is in America, the barbarous
heathen Indian is in America, and two millions of white people in the
mountain region in four hundred counties, where ignorance is solid,
are in America. These all look to the American Missionary Association.
Will it not be our turn next to receive from the churches their
increasing Godspeed on this work in such measure that we may carry the
truth and the life to those who ought to have it.

  *     *     *     *     *

The Connecticut Normal Industrial School previous to the brief spring
vacation was visited by many northern friends at Thomasville, Ga.,
upon the occasion of its closing exercises. The _Thomasville Times_
calls sympathetic {119} attention to the work and adds "That the boys
and girls are being carefully taught and trained will be apparent to
any one who will go to the Institution and see its workings. The
attendance has averaged over two hundred." Thomasville is not far
removed from Quitman geographically but, in point of intelligent
regard for its own interests and the interests of the Negro, the
distance is incalculable. As Joseph said to his brethren, we can say
to the school incendiaries of Quitman, "Ye meant it for evil but the
Lord meant it for good."

  *     *     *     *     *

An attractive and interesting four-paged weekly journal called the
_Chinese Evangelist_ comes to us. It is the first number of a
curiosity in the way of a newspaper, being printed half in the English
and half in the Chinese language. Its editor is Mr. J.S. Harper, son
of Rev. A.F. Harper, of Canton College, and the manager is Guy Maine,
a Christian Chinaman and member of the Broadway Tabernacle Church. The
address of the editor is No. 117 West 87th St., New York, and of the
manager, No. 15 University Place. It is intended for all workers in
Chinese Sunday-schools, and every teacher of Chinese Sunday-school
scholars would do well to send a dollar and secure this invaluable aid
for a year. Its column of items is named "Tea Leaves." We would
suggest that the motto for this bright little paper be "_Tu doces_."

  *     *     *     *     *

  THE VERNACULAR IN INDIAN SCHOOLS.

BY SECRETARY STRIKEY.

This question is not settled. One thing that has kept it unsettled has
been the uncertain use of the term "missionary schools" in the Orders
of the Indian Department. What is precisely a missionary school? Let
me try to explain. There are three kinds of schools in the
nomenclature of the Indian Office, based on the sources of their
support.

1. _Government_ Schools, supported wholly by Government
appropriations--such as those at Carlisle, Genoa, etc. These may be
left out of the account in this discussion, for no one objects to the
Government's directing the studies in them.

2. _Contract_ Schools, so called because the missionary societies
which sustain them receive under _contract_ with the Government a
certain amount of money in aid of their support. The school at Santee,
Nebraska, and the school at Yankton, Dakota, are specimens of this
class. But these are _mission_ schools, for the societies which
support them would not continue to do so for a day except for their
missionary character; and yet these schools are classed by the
Department not as missionary but as contract schools.

3. _Missionary_ Schools, which are supported wholly by missionary
funds, the Government contributing nothing. Here, again, in the recent
{120} order, the Department employs the confusing use of terms,
speaking in general terms of "missionary schools," and then of
missionary schools under the charge of "native Indian teachers," and
at remote points; the inference being that the white teacher of a
missionary school, though it may be in a place so remote that neither
the pupils nor the people can understand the English language, cannot
teach in the vernacular.

With these explanations we present, under date of Feb. 11, 1888,

 THE LATEST ORDERS OF THE DEPARTMENT.

1. No text-books in the vernacular will be allowed in any school where
children are placed under contract or where the Government
contributes, in any manner whatever, to the support of the school; no
oral instruction in the vernacular will be allowed at such schools.
The entire curriculum must be in the English language.

2. The vernacular may be used in missionary schools only for oral
instruction in morals and religion, where it is deemed to be an
auxiliary to the English language in conveying such instruction; and
only native Indian teachers will be permitted to otherwise teach in
any Indian vernacular; and these native teachers will only be allowed
so to teach in schools not supported in whole or in part by the
Government and at remote points, where there are no Government or
contract schools where the English language is taught. These native
teachers are only allowed to teach in the vernacular with a view of
reaching those Indians who cannot have the advantage of instruction in
English, and such instruction must give way to the English-teaching
schools as soon as they are established where the Indians can have
access to them.

3. A limited theological class of Indian young men may be trained in
the vernacular at any purely missionary school, supported exclusively
by missionary societies, the object being to prepare them for the
ministry, whose subsequent work shall be confined to preaching unless
they are employed as teachers in remote settlements, where English
schools are inaccessible.

4. These rules are not intended to prevent the possession or use by
any Indian of the Bible published in the vernacular, but such
possession or use shall not interfere with the teaching of the English
language to the extent and in the manner hereinbefore directed.

The gravamen of the objections urged in all this controversy is that
the _Government has no right to interfere with these mission schools_;
in the first place, in excluding all use of the vernacular in contract
schools, even for religious instruction, and in the next place, in
controlling the studies of the mission schools _supported wholly by
missionary money_ and in excluding white teachers from vernacular
schools. The missionary societies have found by long experience that
these mission schools in which the vernacular is taught, especially in
remote places, are the most effective, and in many cases the only
modes by which the people can be reached by the Gospel. The pupils are
taught to read the Bible and it is carried by them to their homes. Now
we ask, is it the function of the Government of the United {121}
States to dictate in matters so purely religious and to override the
Christian churches in the choice of their most approved methods of
disseminating the Gospel?

 PRESIDENT CLEVELAND'S LETTER.

The President, under date of March 29, 1888, in response to some
resolutions adopted by the Philadelphia M.E. Conference, writes a
letter on this subject, which deserves careful and candid
consideration, both for what it concedes and for what it does not
concede. We present the portion of the letter bearing upon the points
at issue.

"Secular teaching is the object of the ordinary Government schools,
but surely there can be no objection to reading a chapter in the Bible
in English, or in Dakota if English could not be understood, at the
daily opening of those schools, as is done in very many other
well-regulated secular schools. It may be, too, that the use of words
in the vernacular may be sometimes necessary to aid in communicating a
knowledge of the English language, but the use of the vernacular
should not be encouraged or continued beyond the limit of such
necessity, and the "text books," the "oral instruction" in a general
sense, and the curriculum certainly should be in English. In
missionary schools moral and religious instruction may be given in the
vernacular as an auxiliary to English in conveying such instruction.
Here, while the desirability of some instruction in morals and
religion is recognized, the extreme value of learning the English
language is not lost sight of. And the provision which follows, that
only native teachers shall "otherwise" (that is, except for moral or
religious instruction) teach the vernacular, and only in remote places
and until Government or contract schools are established, is in exact
keeping with the purpose of the Government to exclude the Indian
languages from the schools as far as is consistent with a due regard
for the continuance of moral and religious teaching in the missionary
schools, and except in such cases as the exclusion would result in the
entire neglect of secular or other instruction."

On this letter let me remark:

1. That it concedes what has not heretofore been granted, the reading
of the Bible in the vernacular in contract schools and its use in
explaining the English. We accept this concession with gratification.

2. But it makes no concession whatever (beyond that made in the order
of the Commissioner) in regard to the use of the vernacular in schools
supported wholly by missionary funds, or in the employment of white
teachers in vernacular schools in remote districts. Until concessions
are made on these points, the controversy will go forward.

The aim of the Government is _expedient_, in trying to secure
ultimately the use of the English language among the Indians. The aim
of the missionary societies is to fulfil an imperative _duty_, in
trying to reach the Indians with the Gospel in the most effective
methods. There should be mutual respect for these aims; the Government
should yield to the conscientious conviction of the missionary
societies as to methods for giving religious {122} instruction, and
the missionary societies should co-operate with the Government in
introducing the English language as rapidly as possible consistently
with their higher aim. I venture to suggest an outline of Regulations
that would probably attain both these objects and meet other
objections to the ruling of the Department that are not removed by the
President's letter.

 DETAILS OF PROPOSED REGULATIONS.

1. No text-books in the vernacular will be allowed in any Government
school, supported wholly by the Government; no oral instruction in the
vernacular will be allowed at such schools. The entire curriculum must
be in the English language.

2. In contract schools supported in part by missionary societies, the
vernacular may be used only for the reading of the Sacred Scriptures,
and for oral instruction in morals and religion and where it is deemed
to be an auxiliary to the English language in conveying such
instruction.

3. In all "missionary schools" supported entirely by missionary or
benevolent funds, no restrictions will be put upon the use of the
vernacular, with the understanding, however, that the English language
shall be introduced as rapidly as those conducting these schools shall
deem compatible with the higher aim--religious teaching; and that when
these schools shall be prepared to use the English language wholly,
the Department will give them a place on the list of contract schools
rather than to establish others in their stead. If new mission schools
are established they must be so located as not to interfere with
existing Government or contract schools.

4. That any religious denomination shall, at its discretion and
entirely at its own cost, be allowed to conduct special classes in the
vernacular for the training of teachers and preachers. As it is
desirable that those teachers and preachers should be taught in
English studies as well as in the vernacular, these classes may be
conducted in connection with contract schools, yet so as not to
interfere in any way with the regular curriculum in the English
language.

  *     *     *     *     *

"Ramona Days," is the title of a neatly printed pamphlet of
forty-three pages, being the January number of a quarterly, published
by the Indian Department of the University of New Mexico. This Indian
school is named in honor of Mrs. Helen Hunt Jackson, who has rendered
such valuable services to the Indians in setting forth in thrilling
terms their wrongs, and in pleading so pathetically for their rights.
The Ramona school is under the efficient supervision of Pres. H.O.
Ladd, and is aided in part by the American Missionary Association.

The pamphlet is not a catalogue of the school, but contains a variety
of interesting matter on Indian affairs, the titles of some of the
articles being; "Wiser Methods," "Famous Apache Chiefs," "Treaty
Obligations to the Navajoes," "A Recent Movement Toward Indian
Civilization," "Ramona Memorial," etc., etc. There are also letters
from the teachers, and two cuts, one representing the proposed
Memorial Building, Ramona. Mr. Ladd's {123} work lies largely among
that remarkably promising race of Indians, the Apaches, and those who
wish to know more about them would do well to have the pamphlet. It
can be had by addressing Rev. H.O. Ladd, Santa Fe, New Mexico;
subscription price, 50 cents for the four numbers.

  *     *     *     *     *

  THE TIME FACTOR IN THE SOUTHERN PROBLEM.

BY REV. A.H. BRADFORD, D.D.

The supreme question in English politics is the unity of the empire.
The problem of the mother country is, How may the scattered colonies
be joined in one body whose heart shall be London? All the other
questions of the island-empire are but parts of this. This in turn is
forced into prominence by the under-current of the world's aspiration
for larger liberty. "The world no longer for the few, but for the
many," is the watchword of an increasing number in all the nations.
How to maintain the manhood of her subjects, and yet not to force the
dismemberment of the empire, is the question uppermost in old England.

With us, the problem is not one of scattered colonies but of divergent
people. There is in the United States the double problem of how to
consolidate and preserve the interests of a nation with a long area
north and south, and with the most diverse elements of population ever
gathered under one flag. This is complicated by other factors. Our
study is confined to those which touch what is known as the Southern
question. The problems of English and American political and religious
life are identical in that both are inspired by the watchword of the
rising multitudes, "The world for the many."

The Southern problem is but part of the larger one of area and races.
Consider a few facts. The South is peopled chiefly by two classes,
native whites and native blacks. Both whites and blacks are there to
remain. More whites leave the South than blacks, and the population is
increasing. Emigration avoids the States chiefly inhabited by blacks.
It is not probable that the exodus of whites will be very great. The
population of the future will probably be of the same classes,
although the proportion is rapidly changing. Native whites and native
blacks, unless signs fail, will possess the land.

The Negro race is appallingly fertile. It shows no sign of decadence.
It is multiplying faster than any other. The number of blacks in the
United States has risen from four millions to nearly eight millions
since the war. That has been entirely by natural reproduction. The
increase of whites during the decade from 1870 to 1880 was twenty-nine
per cent.; of blacks thirty-five per cent. If, now, we allow nine per
cent. for the increase of the whites by immigration, we find that the
increase of blacks over the whites by natural order is about fourteen
per cent. Here, then, is a {124} simple problem in arithmetic. If the
blacks increase on an average fourteen per cent. faster than the
whites, and to the South there is little immigration, how long will it
be before the blacks preponderate? They will go neither to Africa, to
Mexico, nor to the West Indies. They are here to stay. They are
multiplying faster than their white neighbors. They are growing in
consciousness of power faster than in intelligence. What is the sure
result of conscious but blind power? The story of Samson answers. The
problem is the new-birth of a rapidly increasing race. How long it
will take may possibly be imagined from the questions which follow.

I. How long will it require for race-prejudices to go? I put that
question to an intelligent colored man who had been a slave. His
answer was, "Until the present generation is dead."

The conflict between classes in the South will last until they
recognize that they have an identity of interests, or that they are
brethren. Prejudice is neither dead nor fast dying. There is a change
in the cities, but it does not reach far inland. In how many Southern
States are the same privileges extended to both races in schools? in
cars? in hotels? in churches? This prejudice is in the blood. Heredity
and training have both fostered it. Race prejudices die slowly. For
centuries the contest between Patrician and Plebeian was carried on in
ancient Rome. The subject-class never affiliated with the
master-class. Two or three hundred years ago a new people was
introduced into the north of Ireland. The north is essentially
Scottish. Its inhabitants are Protestant and phlegmatic. In the south,
the religion is Romanist, and the people are mercurial. They are of
the same color. They have had the same history for centuries. For
nearly five hundred years, the Turk has been a disturbing factor in
Europe. The Turk is Asiatic. He is surrounded by European life. How
rapidly has the antipathy between races disappeared where the Turk has
power? The race-lines are as distinct as if the waters of a white
river and a black ran in the same channel. The Hebrews are found in
all parts of the world. They are industrious, and as decent as the
average man; they mingle with other people, and yet almost everywhere
the prejudice against them is constant and bitter. How long before
Protestant Orangemen and Catholic Irishmen will walk arm and arm in
the same procession? How long before the German and Russian and
Englishman will recognize the Jew as a brother? In the South, the
antipathy is between black and white, between a master-class and a
subject-class, between oppressed and oppressor. How long before this
prejudice will disappear?

II. How much time will be required for the consciousness of having
been wronged to wear from the breast and the blood of the black man?
This consciousness of having been wronged is not a race-prejudice, and
yet it may become one. It is hard to eradicate. It is aggravated when
the same feelings are in many hearts. This is a complicated factor.
Some of {125} the blacks seem incapable of sentiments of revenge. They
are too lighthearted to cherish grievances. But all are not so. The
pure blacks who carry with them the consciousness of having been
deeply injured, are many. What will you say of the mulattoes? A man
who knows his father, and knows that his father ignores his existence,
may keep it to himself, but he cannot smother his feeling. He who sees
his brothers and sisters pass him on the street in carriages, living
in comfort and honor, while he is poor, and nothing to them, will, in
proportion as he is a man, hate the social order in which they live.
Until this consciousness of having been injured and degraded vanishes,
the Southern question will disturb political and social life.

III. Closely allied to the consciousness of degradation is the lack of
manly feeling. Appreciation of manhood is a condition of improvement.
He who thinks himself only an animal will live like one. Does this
condition exist at the South? It could not be otherwise. Any one who
has travelled there must have his faith in the evolution of some men
from the lower animals immeasurably strengthened. Rev. Dr. Taylor, of
New York, has said that he knows that the Darwinian theory cannot be
true, because, if it were, "an Englishman's right arm would have
developed into an umbrella long ago." But Dr. Taylor would find faces
in the South which, from their resemblance to lower orders of life,
might weaken his faith in his demonstration.

The black race is no more degraded than our own would be under similar
circumstances, but its condition is appalling. How long will it take
to develop the consciousness of manhood where all the tastes, and all
the tendencies, and almost all the environment, are low and in the
opposite direction? The colored people have not the help of higher and
refining influences. Their tendencies have been downward, and present
environment increases the tendency. Regeneration or reform is not the
work of a year or a generation. The change will come only by the
creation of new and higher conditions, and with the birth of a more
self-respecting stock.

IV. How long will be required for the education of the colored people
and the poor whites?

The author of "An Appeal to Caesar" says, "The Southern man, black or
white, is not likely to be greatly different to-morrow from what he
was yesterday. Generations may modify; years can only restrain. The
question is not whether education, begun to-day and carried on however
vigorously and successfully by the most approved agencies, would
change the characteristics of to-day's masses. Not at all. The
question is whether it would so act upon them _as they are_, would so
enlighten and inform their minds, as to convince them of the mutual
danger, peril, disaster, that must attend continual oppression or
sudden uprising. We cannot expect to make intelligence instantly
effective in the elevation of individual citizenship, or the exercise
of collective power. Little by little that change must come."
{126}

About ninety per cent, of the whole colored population of the South,
and about forty-five per cent. of those above ten years of age, are
illiterate. In 1880, nineteen per cent., or about one in every five,
of the white people of the South, and seventy-three per cent. of the
colored people, could neither read nor write; and this estimate is far
too large. After fifteen years of the ballot, seventy-three per cent.
of the colored race of the South could neither read nor write. Much is
being done to promote education by schools and charities, but what are
these among so many? To meet the ignorant condition of things, the
Government is doing nothing. The State governments are doing only a
little. In the Southern States previous to the war there was no system
of common schools. After the war there were not even old foundations
to build upon. Everything had to be started _de novo_ by those who had
nothing with which to start. "We must remember," said Dr. Mayo, "that
nine men out of ten of the South never saw what we call a good public
elementary school. It has been said that the public school-buildings
of Denver alone exceed in value all the public school-buildings of the
State of North Carolina."

The average school year throughout the South, in 1880, was less than
one hundred days; the average attendance less than thirty per cent. of
those within school age. In a belt of States where seventy-three per
cent., and probably ninety per cent., of the population are
illiterate, where they are too poor to do much except keep up the
struggle for existence, where there are no traditions of culture,
where it has been a crime for a black man to read, where the Nation is
doing nothing, and where the State, when it does its best, provides
instruction which reaches only thirty per cent. of those of school age
for one hundred days in a year, and where the population is increasing
so rapidly that in 1900 the blacks will be in a decided majority,
charity and religion are doing--what? The progress under the
circumstances is amazing, but how long will it take to educate the
nineteen per cent. of Southern whites, and seventy-three per cent., of
Southern blacks? There is more illiteracy now than at the close of the
war, because education has not kept pace with the increase of the
race.

V. How long will be required for the _moralizing_ of the lower classes
of the South? Ability to make moral discriminations grows slowly.
Ability to appreciate moral motives grows still more slowly. These
people were trained in a school in which virtue was ignored. They have
lived under conditions which have put a premium on theft. Slavery
always makes thieves. The heredity of the passion for stealing is just
as clearly marked as the heredity of the Roman nose or the faculty for
music. The transmission of the tendency toward the gratification of
the animal propensities is as definite as, and stronger than, the
tendency for insanity and consumption to reproduce themselves. These
people come into life blind, {127} and find little but darkness around
them. Here you have about eight millions with an ancestry which began
in heathenism and has had two centuries of slavery--a people
inheriting all the evils of slavery; a people who have never been
trained to make moral discriminations, and whose ancestors for unknown
generations have been trained still less than they; a people who have
none, or at least but little, of the inspiration toward a higher moral
life which comes from a healthy environment; a people whose religion
is almost all emotional; who can soar on the wings of imagination and
enthusiasm to heights which would make an archangel dizzy; who from
paroxysms of anguish at the condition of those whose burning bodies
are lighting the fires of hell, will go off and commit adultery or rob
a hen-roost as complacently as if to do so were a part of their
religion. This is not fiction. Religion has not meant chastity, for
slavery made that impossible; it has not meant justice, for injustice
forged their chains; it has not meant generosity, for they had
nothing; it has been simple emotion. The ethical element has been
absent, and it was through no fault of the black man.

In 1860, President Hopkins said that a greater proportion of the
Sandwich Islanders could read than of the people in New England. They
were educated but not moralized. There were three hundred thousand of
them a century and a half ago; in 1883, there were forty-nine
thousand. Education without morality is no safeguard.

Prof. Gilliam shows, from census reports, that if the population of
the Southern whites increases for a century, as at present, in 1985,
there will be ninety-six million whites in the Southern States, and in
1980, one hundred and ninety-two million blacks. Statistics may lie;
but there is enough truth in these to give terrible emphasis to the
inquiry, How long before the colored people will be sufficiently
educated to need no help? How long before they will have sufficient
moral discrimination to know what the commandments require? When we
realize how difficult is the task of inducing men with the environment
of Christian influence at the North, and in England, to live even
decent lives, the wonder is that the freedmen do as well as they do.
How long before we can expect a race with such antecedents and
environments to be fitted to be left to themselves? What answer must
be given? I am not exaggerating the picture. I am only hinting at
conditions of heathenism which exist. I am least of all blaming these
poor and needy people; but none the less clear and strong comes the
appeal for their moral and intellectual emancipation. The moralizing
of a race which has such a history, how long will that require? No
people ever rose more rapidly in the world's history. That shows what
is possible. It does not tell us when our work will be finished. So
long as one-half of the American republic is inhabited by those whose
interests are alien to the other half, there can be no permanent
prosperity. It has been said that there are three essentials to the
{128} permanent unity of a nation; viz., unity of language, unity of
interest and unity of religion. There is a common language between the
blacks and whites, but the unity of interest is not recognized, and
agreement in religion is only in name. The religion of the poor whites
in the South is mechanical, and unintelligently doctrinal; the
religion of the blacks is emotional and fantastic; and the religion of
both blacks and whites is lacking in the ethical element. The process
of political reconstruction has been progressing for twenty years and
more, and is still incomplete. That is an easy work compared with what
must be created intellectually, and socially, and morally. Before the
Southern problem will be solved, a new stock must take the place of
those who were reared in slavery; the old traditions must fade, and
education, and an ethical type of Christianity, must do their work.
How long will be required for that, none can tell. In the meantime,
new complications may arise. The principles of socialism and anarchy
are not unlikely to pervade the South, and if the masses of blacks are
ever exploited by a central, unknown and irresponsible committee of
agitators, the results must be a new reign of terror. The labor
agitators are moving southward. It has been said that colored people
have no tendencies toward socialism and anarchy. I am no prophet, but
I will hazard the prediction that it will not be long before the
socialistic agitator will stir up a commotion at the South that will
make employers of labor and people of wealth tremble.

The sentiment has sometimes been whispered, that the work of this
Association, and those akin to it, was about accomplished. That
sentiment has selfishness or ignorance at the bottom of it. How long
must this work be kept up? Until all that mass of darkness which fills
the Southern horizon be shot through and through with shafts of light.
How long must it be kept up? Until the last trace of prejudice that
separates brother from brother shall have been removed. How long will
this thing be kept up? Until the black man feels that he is a man;
until he can vote intelligently, and live wisely, and until he has the
ability and the will to discriminate carefully in matters of morals.
How long must it be kept up? Until no man can plead ignorance, or want
of opportunity, for rejecting the Lord Jesus Christ. The Eastern
question has been a live question in European politics for more than
four centuries. It is no more puzzling than the Southern question is
with us. There is an experiment in physics that is typical of this
work. An iron bar is suspended in the air and then a tiny cork, hung
from a string, is thrown against it. At first no impression is made,
but the blows are repeated, until, by and by, the bar begins to
tremble, then to vibrate, then to swing to and fro. The repeated
impacts of the little cork at last move the mass. It will not be by
any great rush that the Southern problem will be solved. It will yield
at last to the constancy, and fidelity, of the great multitude of
those who love their brother because they love their Lord; who are
content to work in secret, {129} and many of whom already rest in
unmarked graves. That mass of ignorance, wretchedness and wrong will
swing and disappear at last before the multitudinous strokes of
individual gifts and individual prayers.

All the problems which are vexing the older nations are essentially
social problems, and the watchword of all the movements that are
undermining thrones and caste, and the wicked social order, is, "The
world no longer for the few, but for the many." In America the _many_
are already in possession, and the problem with us is, How may our
rulers--the people who can never be dethroned--be rendered competent
to rule? That is the question to which the American Missionary
Association is devoting itself; and its answer is the only true one:
By making the people intelligent, and Christian. And how long before
that will be accomplished? A Scotchman once asked an Irishman, "Why
were half-farthings coined in England?" Pat instantly replied, "To
give Scotchmen an opportunity of contributing to missions." When will
this problem be solved? Never, if the Christians of America are like
Pat's Scotchman, but quicker than any of us dream, if all the
Christians of America are like that woman in the New Testament who put
into the treasury two mites.

  *     *     *     *     *

THE SOUTH.

  SOUTHERN TESTIMONY.

We insert the following from the _Southern Presbyterian_, as a recent
testimony to the views, principles and work of the American Missionary
Association. It will be all the stronger from the fact that it was not
written for a testimony, but as a setting forth of facts by a
Southerner to Southerners.

  The old masters and the old slaves are now rapidly passing into
  eternity. In ten years more no one of our people, white or black,
  under _forty years_ of age, will know personally anything of
  slavery. It then comes to this, that now and from this time
  forward, we white Christians must be impressed with the fact that
  we have here at our doors, in our houses, offices, stores and
  kitchens, and on our farms, not slaves, but a race of people,
  three-fourths of whom are but a little removed from savages in so
  far as their knowledge of religion is concerned. They have among
  them those whom they call preachers; they hold meetings, they
  halloo, they shout, but no _saving truth_ is preached or heard from
  that source. The result is great animal excitement, but no moral
  elevation. Then many of them are receiving secular education. That
  sharpens their intellects but gives no Christian character. It does
  just the opposite; it fits them for rascality. They are increasing.
  There are probably eight millions of them now, and there will be
  many millions more. Those who are dying without Christ are dying
  here in a Christian land without hope.

  The statement of a Congregational missionary recently made, is
  probably true, viz.: that "one-fourth of the race is improving
  rapidly," yet much the larger part of them are almost, if not
  altogether, _heathen_. They are not across the ocean; under God's
  providence they are here, where you can touch them with your
  finger. Why here? {130} It will not do to say that nothing can be
  made out of them. Go to Texas, to Tennessee, and come right here to
  Atlanta now, and our most intelligent white men will tell you that
  on the prohibition question, negroes, educated, smart and very
  eloquent, have made, and are making, _ringing_ speeches. There have
  been smart speakers on both sides. Some of their speeches would do
  credit to any white orator in the South. Dr. Sanderson, our late
  Professor at Tuskaloosa, stated on the floor of the Synod of
  Alabama last week, that he had taught a good deal, and that a young
  negro, twenty years of age, one of our divinity students at
  Tuskaloosa, was as smart a pupil as he had ever seen; that if he
  were in the State University he would be in its first rank of
  students, and that he heard him recently preach a sermon on the
  mediatorial work of Christ, such that he (Dr. Sanderson) would not
  undertake to make a better one on that majestic theme. * * *

  In Dallas Presbytery, Texas, recently, a black man was examined for
  two days on Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and on all that is required by
  our Book of Government for ordination, and he did not falter once.
  So the brethren there testify.

  Then it comes to this: this race of people is here; the great body
  of them are heathen. Can anyone doubt that it is the purpose of the
  Almighty to prepare a large number of them, converted, educated and
  civilized, to go back to Africa to redeem that continent for
  civilization and for Christ? We are commanded to preach the Gospel
  to every creature, to teach it to all nations.

  *     *     *     *     *

  OUR WORK, AS A GRADUATE OF FISK UNIVERSITY SEES IT.

BY WILLIAM A. CROSTHWAITE.

The American Missionary Association is doing more to quicken the hopes
and aspirations of the Southern Negro, more toward arousing the
Southern white man to educate himself, and more toward bringing the
two races to an acknowledgment of each other's rights, than any other
similar institution in the country.

In the summer of 1884, near Leesburg, Texas, a well-appointed Negro
school was burned by the whites of that community. The colored people,
seeing their hope of years in ashes, advertised their little holdings
for sale, and prepared to leave in a body. But the whites offered to
supplement the insurance on the former building and to re-build the
school, if the colored people would remain in the community. The terms
were accepted, and now _West Chapel_, which is the name of the school,
is excellently furnished and has a $200 bell upon it, and is the best
known school in Northeast Texas. Previous to the burning of West
Chapel, the whites were continually distracted by factional fights.
There was general apathy with regard to improvement in any way
whatever. Their teachers were always of the inferior class. But, when
they found that the colored people would have a school, they decided
to have one also. The colored people bought a bell. So did they. The
colored people had a foreign teacher. So must they have one, and they
paid $750 a year for him. One of the white citizens of the locality
summed the situation up thus:--"West Chapel is to the whites what a
coal of fire is on the back of a terrapin." This school was organized
by a Fisk student and has ever {131} since been taught by students of
Fisk. Thus is the A.M.A. lifting up the Negro directly and the whites
indirectly, and establishing friendly relations between the two.

But this is no isolated case. The story is the same wherever the
educated Negro comes in contact with the whites. At one time, our
school was so far in advance of the white school, that I was told by
my school director that "no high-learnt teacher was wanted to teach
'Nigger Schools,'" and I was actually driven from my school by threats
of violence.

The North can better understand the work of the American Missionary
Association, when it is fully understood that the presence of Fisk
University in Nashville brought about the existence of Vanderbilt
University. When Fisk began to send out her graduates as refined and
upright gentlemen, and the newspapers were enthusiastic in their
accounts of its literary and musical exhibitions, the white people
said; "We must have a university in Nashville also."

In the recent Prohibition campaign in Tennessee, the students of Fisk
were one of the chief factors. In the beginning of the movement, the
cry; "Where does Fisk stand on this question?" went up from the good
people all over the State. Fisk was the first college to declare in
favor of the proposed Amendment, and one hundred young men and women
went from her walls and fought valiantly for the cause.

It is due the profound Christian spirit that characterizes the work of
the Association to say, that every student and alumnus of Fisk in the
State of Tennessee was an ardent supporter of the cause, save two.
During the campaign the most cordial feelings existed between the
better elements of both races. Heretofore these things were almost
unheard of.

There was a time when policy or political expediency had no effect
upon the prejudices of the Southern whites, but the educational
process inaugurated by the North is elevating a class of colored
people to a plane where they are respected as never before. No State
or Federal aid can do for us what the A.M.A. is doing. Such aid as the
Blair Bill proposed would meet a certain need, and enable the men that
are educated by the A.M.A. to get at the masses; but the peculiar work
of preparing honest and devout Christian leaders must be otherwise
provided for. The complete regeneration of the South is a thing of the
future. The A.M.A. must remain among us to hasten on "the harvest of
the golden year."

That the Christianization of the Negro must come from without his own
institutions, will be clearly seen by looking at his present religious
condition. The new life that is developing cannot be crowded into the
narrow limits of his church. The moral element is almost entirely
wanting in his creed and doctrine. Such is the condition of the church
that moral and spiritual growth are impossible. He must be educated
away from the institutions that attended his enslavement; as far from
them as Canaan is from Egypt. Again, the pulpit, with comparatively
few honorable exceptions, {132} is filled with adventurers and impure
ministers. To a great extent this is true. But signs of a spiritual
and moral exodus are everywhere manifest. The judgment of God rests
heavily upon the Negro's temple-worship and the structure tumbles to
the ground. Within the last two years I have seen six of the largest
colored churches in Tennessee split on moral grounds, and the
discontent with what is bad, grows among them. The old associations
are losing their power over the rising generation. Intelligent men are
seeking to supply their spiritual and moral wants. The A.M.A. has but
to persist in the establishment of its school and church work among
the colored people, with good strong men as ministers, and it is sure
to be the leaven of the church of the future for the Negro people.

Last summer an old father, who had educated four children at Fisk
University and had himself been there on one Commencement occasion,
said to me:--"That Fisk school is the _buildin'-up-est_ place to our
people in the world. I never expect to have such a good time and
treatment again until I get to heaven." Thus are our hopes quickened
and our aspirations for nobler things awakened.

But to one who understands the situation, the question of our
education is of serious moment. All our institutions of higher
learning are living from hand to mouth, with no endowment, and the
North's purse-strings are growing tighter as the years go by. On the
other hand, prejudice strikes savagely at our State appropriations.
This year, in the advanced State of Tennessee, the white State-student
gets one hundred dollars while the colored gets only twenty-two
dollars and a half. In his poverty what can the Negro student do with
this sum in the way of educating himself?

I could take you in the homes of those whom you have educated, then
could you appreciate the wisdom of your investments. It is around the
fireside, and in the conduct of the children, that your noble work is
manifesting itself so clearly. The intellectual, moral and spiritual
life found there are the true and only guarantees that old things are
passing away.

The abject condition of the great body of Negroes appeals to Christian
religion and philanthropy for the help that must come to redeem their
lost minds and souls. The South cannot give them a Christian
education. The cry goes up to the great, warm heart of the North. We
crave the crumbs that fall from your God-given, bountiful table.

  *     *     *     *     *

  A PASTOR'S FIRST VIEW.

  A pastor who was educated at the North and who was graduated at the
  Hartford Theological Seminary, has for the first time made the
  acquaintance of his race in the South. He had never met his own
  people as a race until he entered into the service of the American
  Missionary Association. His impressions and testimony have,
  therefore, an additional interest.

In reference to the field: it is large and interesting, and requires
more {133} than ordinary attention, both to that part of it under
cultivation and that which is not yet. I have arranged my visits in
such a way as to make it practicable for me to do justice to both;
visiting church members the last week in each month (except in case of
sickness), and using the rest of the time (apart from other necessary
duties) for visits outside.

I am thus brought into direct contact with our people and learn a
great deal about their condition. In some places it does seem actually
as if liberty and civilization are still mysteries to them.

When I was in the North and heard or read descriptions of the
condition and mode of living of the colored people of the South, I
often thought that those descriptions were very highly colored, but I
am now perfectly cured of all my doubts. My visits furnish me with the
most plausible attestation of the facts. Squalor, with its long train
of attendants, may be commonly seen in every direction, and perhaps
not confined to the lower-conditioned of our people either. The
desecration of the Lord's day is actually frightful. It is very
literally used as a "day of rest from labor." On every hand the people
are seen resting--resting from labor in the houses, on the stoops and
on the streets, instead of being in the house of God. In very many
instances, however, we succeed in getting some of them to attend
church, but the work is somewhat uphill. I trust that this abnormal
condition to which slavery has reduced them will eventually succumb to
the effective educational weapon that is being brought to bear upon
them, that of the American Missionary Association especially, and may
the time soon come for the South when the Holy Spirit working in and
through the various missionary Boards, and also other agencies, shall
spread righteousness and education and the true art of living, among
these benighted people. I am praying, others are praying, and you,
too, must help us to pray and to wait for the quickening influences
and a fresh baptism of the Holy Spirit.

  *     *     *     *     *

  TALLADEGA FRUIT.

BY MISS E.B. EMERY.

The missions of the American Missionary Association at the South are
like orange trees, perennial, evergreen, and continually bearing
golden fruit, and of these there is none more abounding in vitality
than Talladega. All the year round the foliage glistens, the
blossoming sheds its fragrance, and every winter there is an ample
harvest. Sometimes one from abroad comes in to shake the tree and
gather the fruit, and sometimes not; but however that may be, the soil
is previously and thoroughly prepared by these consecrated
missionaries, the tree is watered and nourished and tended the year
round, and the harvest _expected_, and it comes.

Are there no spiritual frosts to blight? They are impossible, if the
{134} spiritual atmosphere be kept clear, and the Holy Ghost be a
daily and hourly companion and friend.

It is by no means unusual in Talladega for every unbelieving pupil in
the boarding department to be converted. This year there were over
forty hopeful conversions, and Rev. James Wharton, an English
evangelist, by his earnest preaching was of very great assistance. It
is noticeable that if any who have had little _previous_ training are
converted through the preaching of an evangelist, they are not likely
to hold out well.

On the first Sunday in March, twenty-seven of the converts were
received into the college church, with two from the Baptist Church.
More will come later as the fruits of the revival, while a few will
join other churches. Eighteen of the number were young men, and among
them were the two sons of Pres. DeForest, one fourteen, the other
nine, years of age.

Prof. G.W. Andrews, D.D., the pastor this year, conducted the
services; there was no sermon proper and no time for any, but there
was much of the beautiful music of these colored people; they sing out
their fervid souls with their rich and powerful voices. Nearly all
were baptized, and much more was made of the right hand of fellowship
than is usual in any Northern church. And it is needful for these
children, for they will call for constant help months and years to
come. With few exceptions, they are not reared in Christian homes, are
not educated from the cradle in the Christian faith. The services were
both solemn and joyful, and very tender and touching.

Such an avowal is the most significant of all things, anytime,
anywhere, but here we know that every life is to be one of toil and
bitter struggle, a fight in which the odds are, to appearances, all
against them; more than all, that this young man, that young woman,
with the dusky face, the mellow voice and the eager spirit, now in
covenant with us, is to be a missionary to the heathen, and of his own
people. What may he not accomplish? What may she not do for Christ?
And these heathen are in our own country; they are our own people.
These young missionaries are very peculiarly ours, and it is through
the Northern churches that they are trained for their work. Shall not
then those churches adopt them in their hearts, carry them in their
prayers, and let them suffer no lack in their preparation? Their work
in the future for the Master's kingdom will depend very much upon us
Christians of the North.

Talladega College is exceedingly prosperous. The day-school is very
large; the Sunday-school packs the chapel, and the Sunday congregation
is much too crowded for health or comfort in a room seating but two
hundred and fifty. The college is working all the time, for a church,
earning many small sums. The result, with some gifts, amounts to about
$400. Where is the man or the woman to aid in this godly enterprise?
to share in this work so essential and so abundantly fruitful?
{135}

  *     *     *     *     *

  THREE PICTURES FROM LE MOYNE SCHOOL, MEMPHIS, TENN.

BY MISS ESTHER H. BARNES.

I would like to bring before you three pictures which I saw this week.
The first is the interior of a single room. The tattered, soiled bed
and the fireplace took up a large part of the room, and the rest was
nearly filled with the confusion of odds and ends that make up the
belongings of such a home. A feeble fire rested on the uneven bricks
of the fireplace, and the chimney above was covered with newspapers in
the last stages of dilapidation and dirt. There was no window, but a
little sliding shutter, moved aside a few inches, admitted light
enough to make the darkness visible as it fell on the smoke-stained
boards, and the dusky faces of the inmates seated close to the fire on
old chairs and boxes. A home more forlorn than this little pen, which,
with a smaller back shed, is the only residence of at least five human
beings, I can hardly conceive.

Now for a more cheering picture. It is a cozy sitting-room, papered
with taste and furnished in harmony. Everything looks neat, from the
snowy bed-spread to the pretty clock on the mantel, and the dainty
bunch of pansies on the wall above. Open doors give glimpses of other
rooms as well ordered as this, while intelligence and kindness beam in
the dark faces of gentle mother and cheery bright-eyed daughters. When
people ask us how we can bear to teach "niggers," they generally have
in mind those tattered, lazy persons, who are most wont to show
themselves on the street corners, and so make the deepest impression
on the average white mind.

But look at my third picture, and you will see both how we can like
our work, and what is one of the things that make a difference between
the second home I have described and the first. The large school-room
is filled. More than one hundred and twenty-five students are arranged
in classes, most of whom are standing in their places ready to pass to
recitation rooms. One of their number is at the piano. Another stands
at the desk to give the word of command. Now he strikes the bell and
the pupils in long file pass out, marching with their heads up. Not a
teacher is in sight. Everything is orderly and is running of itself,
as it does every day. This is nothing wonderful, of course, though I
know some white schools which could not be trusted to this degree to
the control of monitors. But it is only a sign of the influences that
here lead to self-reliance and self-control. Every year a new set of
uncouth and undeveloped young people come shambling in, looking around
with bewildered eyes. But they soon begin to straighten up and fall
into step. Their vague ideas get settled, and their minds, slow at
first, wake up. In a few years they will be made over new, not
perfect, but vastly improved. They will be out teaching, spreading
light from scores of new centres, and sending new pupils to "Old Le
Moyne."
{136}

  *     *     *     *     *

  THE EVANGELIST AT WORK.

The last night of the three weeks' series of meetings at Marion was a
memorable one. Every night the church, which was a large-sized
building, was well filled with an attentive congregation, hungering
and thirsting for the bread and water of life. After singing and
prayer and hearing the testimonies from the young converts present,
who told with unmistakable clearness how they had given their hearts
to God, a few words were spoken, especially to them, showing what God
requires of them now they have become Christians. Afterwards the
gospel was preached to the unconverted and an invitation given for
those who wished to become Christians to signify their desire. A
number responded, including an old man supposed to be at least ninety
years of age. The old man had long thought of being a Christian, but
never could get to the point of decision until now. He looked back
upon his long life of sin; he wept, he prayed, he arose and confessed
that he had then and there taken Christ as his Saviour. Was not he a
brand plucked from the burning?

It was most encouraging to see a young lady bringing along to the
pastor's house nearly every day some two or three of her school
companions or friends, to be prayed for and spoken with about the way
of salvation. The Christians worked faithfully visiting the houses of
their friends to pray and speak with them and to bring them out to the
meeting at night.

At Mobile, although the first week it rained six days in succession,
yet the people came out well and were repaid for their faithfulness.
Every night for the past three weeks large numbers of all classes have
been personally interested, and with the exception of one service, we
have had cause to thank God for conversions. Fathers and mothers are
rejoicing over sons and daughters brought to Christ. A large number of
young people from the Sabbath-school as well as from the day-school
have started on the new life. The teachers say that a marked change is
observable and that the young converts seem to be trying their very
best to live up to their profession. Forty-six were received into the
church and will have the instruction that is so much needed by young
converts.

One of the teachers and myself, while visiting some of the converts,
found five young women in one house rejoicing in the pardoning love of
God. "Truly," said the old grandmother, "salvation has come to this
house." We found that, some years ago, three mothers had died and left
five orphan children, who were taken by the grandmother and who had
now grown into womanhood. Two sisters first became Christians and the
others soon followed. One said, "I used to be so fond of going to the
theatre, but now I have no heart for that sort of thing; I mean to
live a good Christian life and do all I can for my Saviour." They were
all received into church, and joined as well the Young People's
Society of {137} Christian Endeavor, which is a good thing for young
people, as it trains them for future work, and to be active and useful
in the service of Christ.

JAMES WHARTON.

  *     *     *     *     *

THE CHINESE.

  LETTER FROM REV. W.C. POND.

Our anniversary was an occasion of much interest. The attendance was
large, and our brethren acquitted themselves well. The _Record-Union_,
the principal daily of Sacramento, published both the addresses in
full.

We have good news from our evangelists. They are doing great good, if
we can judge at all by what we see: and they are in training, I
believe, for larger and better service in the years to come. I shall
have much to write about this for the _next Missionary_, much more
than I can crowd into the space allowed me.

The new work at San Buenaventura opens finely. It is already one of
our largest interior schools; and two or three, possibly _four_, of
the Chinese have already been led to believe; so that before Low Quong
returns he expects to organize an Association and get Christian work
into systematic operation.

I am greatly pleased also with the reports from Tucson. Yong Jin, who
has done excellent evangelistic work at Santa Cruz, goes to Tucson
next week. He is an earnest Christian, and though somewhat deficient
in English is better educated in Chinese and is an excellent preacher.

  *     *     *     *     *

  FOUR MONTHS OF EVANGELISTIC WORK.

BY LOW QUONG.

In January last I was asked to do some evangelistic work in the
Northern part of this State. The first place I visited was Oroville.
There we have a branch mission with a fine mission house, or, we might
call it a Chinese church and school combined. The church has a
membership of about fifteen. The evening scholars were usually about
twenty or more. This school has a faithful teacher, and all together
makes a fruitful mission. Although I was there only about a month--yet
I enjoyed the work very much, and my acquaintance with the brethren
there and their kindness to me I can never forget. I will now give you
some little incidents of my work there. The town has about three
hundred Chinese inhabitants, and most of our brethren and scholars
live in the town, but there were also a good many outside of the town.
These are mostly miners. But even these hard-working men, when they
got through their day's work, {138} came to town at night to attend
our evening school; and on Sundays also, to hear the preaching of the
gospel.

At the end of the month, when Mr. Pond came to Oroville, we had the
Lord's supper in our little Chinese church. It was held in the
evening. One far-away brother was informed by letter, and he came over
a long, rough road to attend the Lord's table. It was about eight
o'clock when he reached the church. We asked him what time he started
to walk; he said at one o'clock in the afternoon. He had walked fully
seven hours just for the Lord's supper, and early in the morning he
had to walk back again to his place, while we took the train for
Marysville. During my stay at Oroville, four members were added to the
Association and one was baptized and received to the church. We would
have had two, but one had gone to work in a place sixty miles from
town. He had waited for Mr. Pond to come up for nearly a whole month,
so he could be baptized, and he had gone only a week when Mr. Pond
came. Lately I have received a letter from him, that he has returned
to Oroville.

The Chinese inhabitants at Oroville are very kind to the Christian
Chinese. They never trouble them and always send their boys to the
evening school. I heard not long ago from their teacher, that the
whole mission house has been renovated and a new floor put down at the
expense of the brethren and scholars.

  *     *     *     *     *

  CHIN GAING IN CHINA.

[EXTRACT FROM AN ADDRESS IN ALAMEDA, CAL., BY CHIN GAING.]

It is over eleven years since I left my home in China. Near the end of
1882 I began to attend the mission school in San Francisco. After
being there about two years I joined the Christian Association, and
six months from then I was baptized and joined Bethany Church.

Two years ago I returned to China. My friends there knew that I had
changed my religion, and so, when I went back they asked me many
questions.

My relatives wanted to know about the people in this country, what
religion they had and what gods they worshiped. And whether the
Chinese who went there believed the same as the American people.

I told them we believed in one God. They said, "Which one?"

I answered, the one that created the heaven and the earth, and all
things in the world and the sea. The God who has all power and whom we
ought to worship.

My mother then came up and said: "Do not talk such things; we are
Chinese and must keep our customs."

I said I could not keep those which were against God. So they said:
"If you have anything good, then keep it."

While in China I could not help seeing how much the people spent in
{139} foolishness. They have so many idol processions, which cost a
great deal of money. The people gladly give to keep up their worship,
as they are in darkness and know not the name of Jesus, which is the
only name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.

But how shall they believe in Him of whom they have not heard? And how
shall they hear without a preacher?

And so it is written, "How beautiful are the feet of them that preach
the gospel of peace."

  *     *     *     *     *

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

  WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

 CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

ME.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. C.A.
Woodsbury, Woodfords, Me.

VT.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. Henry
Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

CONN.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171
Capitol Ave., Hartford, Conn.

N.Y.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C.C. Creegan,
Syracuse, N.Y.

OHIO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Flora K. Regal,
Oberlin, Ohio.

ILL.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151
Washington St., Chicago, Ill.

MICH.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Mary B. Warren,
Lansing, Mich.

WIS.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead,
Wis.

MINN.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs. H.L. Chase, 2,750
Second Ave., South, Minneapolis, Minn.

IOWA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Miss Ella B. Marsh,
Grinnell, Iowa.

KANSAS.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs. Addison
Blanchard, Topeka, Kan.

SOUTH DAKOTA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. S.E. Young,
Sioux Falls, Dak.

  *     *     *     *     *

"Twenty-three unanswered letters look down upon me. Eighteen came
to-day." Such is the burdened sigh of one of our earnest, self-denying
missionaries, who is upon the mission field that she may relieve the
suffering, teach the ignorant and save souls, and for whom the days
are all too short for these duties alone.

Have our readers ever felt the burden of unanswered letters? Pastors,
Sunday-school teachers, housekeepers--busy people that you are--have
you ever felt the twinge of unrest, almost discouragement, because
some friendly letter, which you enjoyed receiving, lay unanswered
waiting a spare hour? And have you ever had to "brace up" to what, in
a life of leisure might be a pastime, but in a life so full of care
and responsibility becomes a task? Then you will surely be ready
unselfishly to

  SPARE OUR TEACHERS.

How can it be done? Not by withholding your letters from them. If any
missionaries anywhere need words of appreciation and good cheer they
are those who year after year sacrifice social life and religious
privileges to mingle with the ignorant, uncultured--yes, and
impure--that they may lift them up into the healthful ways of
righteousness. Write to them, encourage {140} them, but do not ask for
a special letter for your next missionary meeting. Tell them _not to
write_, that you have heard or can hear from them every month through
their letters sent to the officers at New York and that you learn of
the work through the A.M.A. magazine. Thank them for making this
monthly missionary letter so full and interesting.

"But that monthly letter is a copied letter," some one answers, "and
we wish our teacher to write to us, _to us alone, and in her own
hand_." Yes, it is a copied letter in order that it may be sent to
others who are interested in, and helping, the same work, and that the
missionaries' time may be given to the work about them instead of
being spent so largely in writing. But it is a fresh letter. It has
the latest monthly news and was written for you, and if not in the
same hand is as truly yours as a typewritten letter, which is the sort
most of us receive and give in the high-work pressure of now-a-days.

We provide _The American Missionary_, furnish our printed leaflets
freely, and will send the monthly missionary letters to all who desire
to hear thus from their contributions--as we hope all do--thus giving
the very best information that the field affords; but we most
earnestly hope the missionaries may be allowed their time for their
missionary duties pressing upon them. _The Missionary_ is the word
from your missionary. Read it, and if you do not like it, write us,
and we will try again next month.

  *     *     *     *     *

RECEIPTS FOR MARCH, 1888.

   MAINE, $146.84.

Augusta. South Cong. Ch. and Soc. $21.45
Bangor. Sab. Sch. of First Parish Ch. 13.85
Belfast. _For Wilmington, N.C._ 1.79
Brewer. Mrs. C.S. Hardy, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 30.00
Brewer. "A Friend." First Ch., _for Indian M._ 10.00
Brunswick. "Little Folks," _for Indian Sch'p_ 25.00
Castine. Prof. F.W. Foster 1.00
Cumberland Center. By Miss J.G. Merrill, Bbl. of C. for Selma, Ala., 2
_for Freight_ 2.00
Limington. By Rev. Chas. H. Gates, _for Freight_ 2.00
Machias. Sarah Hills Sab. Sch. Class _for ed. Indian boy_ 2.50
Portland. Fourth Cong. Ch. 15.00
Portland. Mrs. W.W. Brown's S.S. Class, 10; Class in Bethel Sab. Sch.
1.75; _for Rosebud Indian M._ 11.75
South Berwick. Mrs. Lewis' S.S. Class, _for Wilmington, N.C._ 1.50
South Paris. Cong. Ch. 7.00
Woodfords. By Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, _for Freight_ 2.00

   NEW HAMPSHIRE, $190.30.

Alstead. Miss Eliza Gorham                                 1.00
Bedford. Milton B. George, _for Indian M._                 1.00
Concord. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         28.35
Epping. Mrs. Geo. N. Sheppard's S.S. Class, Cong. Ch.      4.00
Exeter. "Friend"                                          30.00
Haverhill. Members Cong. Ch.                              18.30
Hudson. Cong, Ch. and Soc.                                $3.00
Lancaster. Mrs. A.M. Amsden                                5.00
Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  25.65
Mason. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  5.00
Pembroke. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Wilmington, N.C._   2.00
Piermont. Cong. Ch. and Individuals                       15.00
Stratham. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          10.00
Tilton. Cong. Ch., 40; Class of Boys _for Student Aid_, 2 42.00

   VERMONT, $394.93.

Barnet. Y.P.S.C.E. 1 _for Chinese M._ and 1 _for McIntosh, Ga._ 2.00
Bradford. First Cong. Ch. 30.02
Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. 2.50
Burlington. Ladies of First Ch., _for McIntosh, Ga._ 40.00
Burlington. Mission Band, _for Indian M._ 24.00
Burlington. Sab. Sch. of College St. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._
17.86
Cambridge. Madison Stafford 10.00
Cornwall. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._ 2 _for Freight_ 2.00
East Arlington. Cong. Ch. 7.00
Fairlee. Cong. Ch. 12.25
Greensboro. Cong. Ch. 12.00
Lunenburg. Mrs. C.W. King, Easter offering 5.00
North Bennington. Cong. Ch. 9.83
North Ferrisburg. C.W. Wicker 10.00
Northfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 25.13
Norwich. J.G. Stimson, for Church in Hartford, Vt., Extra 100.00
Orwell. Ladies of Cong. Ch. _for McIntosh, Ga._ $17.57
South Burlington. Eldridge Sab. Sch. 4.00
Waitsfield. Box of C. for McIntosh, Ga., 2 _for Freight_ 2.00
West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch. 11.02
West Fairlee. Mrs. C.M. Holbrook 2.00
West Randolph. Miss Susan B. Albin 6.00
West Randolph. "Mission Builders," First Cong. Ch., _for McIntosh,
Ga._ 6.00
Weybridge. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for McIntosh, Ga._ 5.75
Windham. Cong. Ch. to const., WAYLAND G. ADAMS L.M. 31.00

   MASSACHUSETTS, $5,725.85.

Amesbury. Union Evan. Ch. 10.80
Andover. South Cong. Ch. and Soc., 100; Calvin E. Goodell, 25 125.00
Ashburnham. First Cong. Ch. 26.25
Auburndale. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ 31.07
Boston. E.K. Alden, D.D., "In fraternal remembrance of James Powell"
100.00
" "C.A.H." _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 100.00
" B. Wilkins. Box of Goods, _for Wilmington, N.C._
" Samuel Ward & Co., Quantity of Stationary _for Wilmington, N.C._
Charlestown. Sewing Circle of Winthrop Ch., _for Tougaloo U._ 20.00
Dorchester. Miss Mary A. Tuttle ad'l _for Marie Adlof Fund_ 1.25
Jamaica Plain. R.W. Wood 50.00
" Nellie F. Riley 4.50
Roxbury. Mrs. A.W. Tuffts, _for Freight_ 2.24
------- 277.99
Boxford. Sab, Sch, of Cong, Ch., _for Jellico, Tenn._ 37.51
Brimfield. First Cong. Ch. 6.20
Buckland. Cong. Ch. 26.13
Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. 30.00
Chesterfield. Cong. Ch. 5.00
Chicopee. Eleanor Woodworth, _for Indian M._ 5.00
Chicopee Falls. Ladies Benev. Soc., _for Tougaloo, Miss._ 15.00
Clinton. C.L. Swan, _for Sch'p, Hampton N. & A. Institute_ 70.00
Clinton. Mrs. J.M. Dakin, _for Clinton Chapel, Talladega_ 10.00
Dalon. Cong. Ch., to const. PAYSON E. LITTLE and HEMAN MITCHELL L.M.'s
75.86
Douglas. "Thank offering from a friend." 5.00
East Cambridge. Miss Mary F. Aiken, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 5.00
Easthampton. First Cong. Ch. 65.18
Enfield. Miss Lucretia Cary's S.S. Class, 6; Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
4.05; _for Rosebud Indian M._ 10.05
Erving. Cong. Ch. 4.04
Fall River. Central Cong. Ch. 44.00
Foxboro. Ortho. Cong. Ch. 73.45
Foxboro. Cong. Soc. Bbl., of C., _for Tougaloo, Miss._
Framingham. "Friend." 40.00
Granville. Mr. and Mrs. C. Holcomb 5.00
Hadley. First Ch. 12.00
Hadley. Sab. Sch. of First Ch. 11.00
Haverhill. Bethany Ass'n of North Ch., _for Tougaloo U._ 25.00
Holliston. "Bible Christians of Dist. No. 4." 67.00
Holliston. L.A. Claflin, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ 5.00
Holyoke. Miss'y Soc. _for Rosebud Indian M._ 1.50
Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. 25.00
Lancaster. Sab. Sch. of Evan. Ch. 16.78
Lexington. Hancock Ch. and Soc. $16.00
Littleton. J.C. Houghton 4.00
Lowell. First Cong, Ch. to const. ALBERT J. DONNELL L.M. 32.00
Malden. First Ch. (20 of which from Wm. L. Greene) 78.50
Mansfield. Ortho Cong. Ch. 11.36
Mansfield. Ladies Miss'y Soc., _for Wilmington N.C._ 4.00
Maplewood. Ladies' Union, Bbl. of C., _for Wilmington N.C._, 1 _for
Freight_ 1.00
Medford. "A Friend," bal. to const. MRS. ANNA C. FARNSWORTH L.M. 20.00
Melrose. Ladles of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of material, _for Sewing Dept.
Talladega C._
Merrimac. Ladies Miss'y Soc., by Mrs. Nichols, Treas. 16.75
Millbury. C.E. Hunt, to const. FREDERICK W. HUNT L.M. 30.00
Mittineague. Southworth Co., Case of Paper, _for Straight U._
Montague. Cong. Ch. 9.00
Montville. O.B. Jones, _for Indian M._ 2.00
New Bedford. Mrs. I.H. Bartlett, Jr. 30.00
New Boston. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for Indian M._ 3.72
Newbury. First Ch. 17.05
Newburyport. Harriet O. Haskell 2.00
Newton Center. Ladies Benev. Soc. of First Cong. Ch., _for Student
Aid, Atlanta U._ 40.00
Newton Center. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. _for Indian M._ 25.00
Newton Center. Maria B. Farber Soc. Y.L., Bbl of C., etc., _for
Washington, D.C._
North Amherst. Mrs. Daniel Dickinson, deceased, by Chas. R. Dickinson,
to const. ISABELLE M. PHELPS L.M. 30.00
Northampton. Primary Dep't Edwards Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud Indian
M._ 15.00
North Leominster. Leonard Burrage, _for Theo. Dept. Santee Indian
Sch._ 2000.00
North Reading. Cong. Ch. 6.42
Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 54.93
Peabody. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._ 25.00
Pittsfield. Sab. Sch. of First Ch., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 27.14
Plymouth. Ch. of Pilgrimage 85.22
Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch. 6.35
Randolph. Miss Abby W. Turner, 50; Miss Alice M. Turner, 25; Mrs. John
J. Crawford, 25; _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._ 100.00
Reading. "Friend in Cong. Ch." 2.00
Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc., to const. GEO. A. CHANDLER, GEORGE S.
ROPES and JOHN R. SMITH L.M.'s 339.10
Shelburne Falls. A.N. Russell, 2.5O; Herbert A. Russell, 2.50 5.00
Somerville. Broadway Cong. Ch. 15.80
Somerville. Miss'y Circle of Franklin St. Ch., _for Freight_ 2.10
Southbridge. Cong. Ch. 49.88
South Framingham. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Robbins, Tenn._ 16.06
South Framingham. G.M. Amsden 5.00
South Hadley. First Cong Ch. 29.25
Springfield. Y.P.S.C.E. First Cong. Ch., 50; Sab. Sch. of Memorial
Ch., 25; _for Fisk U._ 15.00
Springfield. Y.P.S.C.E. of First Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._
4.50
Stoughton. Cong. Ch., bal. _for Freight_ 0.75
Tewksbury. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. 15.00
Upton. Bbl of C., _for Mobile, Ala._
Waltham. Ladies of Cong. Ch. Bbl. of material _for Sewing Dept.,
Talladega C._
Ware. Sab. Sch. of East Cong. Ch., _for Santee Indian M._ 25.00
Wellesley. "Friends in Wellesley College," _for Indian M._ 9.00
Westboro. Miss'y Soc., 3, and Pkg. Furnishings, by Miss Bixby, _for
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 3.00
West Boxford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 11.05
West Medway. C. Albert Adams 10.00
West Medway. "A Friend," _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ 3.00
West Somerville. Mrs. Taplin, Bbl. of Goods, 1.30 _for freight, for
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 1.30
Weymouth and Braintree. Cong Ch. 48.76
Whitman. "A Friend," to Const. MRS. LYDIA A. PRATT and MISS LIZZIE
REED L.M'S. 60.00
Wollaston. First Cong. Ch. (10 of which _for Indian M._) 15.00
Worcester. Union Ch., 214.75; Piedmont Ch., 65; "A Friend" 20; Salem
St. Ch., 17.75 317.50
Worcester. P.E. Moen, 50; "S.E.J." 25, _for Indian M._ 75.00
Worcester. O.S. Mission C. of Old South Ch., _for Toughaloo U._ 16.00
Worcester. "Piedmont Ch., A Friend." _for Atlanta U._ 10.00
Worcester. Benev. Soc. of Plym. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._
5.00
---- Massachusetts Indian Ass'n, _for Indian M._ 10.00
---- "A Friend," adl. _for Fisk U._ 31.42
By Charles Marsh, Treas. Hampden Benev. Ass'n:
Agawam. _for Indian M._ 5.00
East Granville 10.00
Indian Orchard 14.78
Ludlow 15.00
Palmer. First 5.06
Springfield. South 66.62
Westfield. First, to const. MRS. MARY E. RICHARDSON L.M. 100.87
West Springfield. First, to const. MRS. C.S. BEARDSLEE L.M. 34 00
------ 251.33
--------
$5,375.85

     LEGACIES.

Beverly. Estate of John Lovett, by Chas. T. Lovett, Ex.    250.00
Sherborn. Estate of Oliver Barber, by J.W. Barber, Ex.     100.00
                                                         --------
                                                        $5,725.35

     CLOTHING, ETC. RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

Andover, Mass. Mrs. Selah Merrill, 1 Bbl. _for Tougaloo U._
Gloucester, Mass. Mary Brooks, 1 Bdl. S.S. Papers
Groton, Mass. Ladies Benev. Soc. of Cong. Ch., 1 Bbl. _for Oaks, N.C._
Malden, Mass. M. Kent, 1 Bbl., _for Kittrell, N.C._
Quincy, Mass. Harriet S. Proctor, 1 Case
Rockport, Mass. 1 Bdl
Yarmouth, Mass. Sewing Circle of Cong. Ch., 1 Bbl., _for Atlanta U._

   RHODE ISLAND, $90.02.

Bristol, "Wide Awakes" of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fort Berthold,
Dak._ 8.00
Little Compton. United Cong. Ch. 21.52
Pawtucket. "Mission Workers" _for Indian Sch'p._ 52.50
Providence. Hon. A.C. Barstow, 10; "A Friend", 1, _for Tougaloo U._
11.00

   CONNECTICUT, $3,249.58.

Ansonia. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ 4.00
Ashford. Mrs. C.S. Trowbridge 5.00
Banksville. George Derby 1.00
Branford. Rev. Henry P. Bake, 10; H.G. Harrison, 10; Cong Ch. 7.69
27.69
Bridgeport. Infant Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian
M._ 11.00
Bristol. Cong. Ch. (56 of which from Ladies, _for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
Ga._) 93.66
Bristol. Mr. E. Peck's S.S. Class, _for Indian M._ 5.00
Cheshire. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ 21.00
Darien. Cong. Ch. 9.29
East Hampton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ 5.00
East Windsor. Mrs. Sarah L. Wells 5.00
Enfield. Sheffield C. Reynolds 1000.00
Enfield. J.N. Allen, _for Indian M._ 100.00
Enfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Straight U._
25.00
Essex. First Cong. Ch. 26.00
Glastonbury. Cong. Ch. (of which 100.72 _for Indian Mission_) 308.12
Glastonbury. J.B. Williams Co., _for Ind'l Building, Austin, Texas_
250.00
Glastonbury. Louise Williams, _for Rosebud Indian M._ 0.50
Greenville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid. Straight U._
15.62
Greenwich. Second Cong. Ch. 31.17
Guilford. First Cong. Ch., to const. DEA. JOHN W. NORTON L.M. 30.00
Hampton. First Cong. Ch., 24.08; "Additional to Collection," 5 29.08
Hartford. Rodney Dennis, 25; Daniel R. Howe, 25, _for Tougaloo U._
50.00
Huntington. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch. Ga._ 11.00
Ivoryton. Mr. Northrup, 10; Mr. Rose, 50c., _for Tougaloo U._ 10.50
Kensington. Geo. W. Ford, 5; Miss F.A. Robbins, 5; Mrs. A.J. Benedict,
5; Rev. A.J. Benedict, 2; Mrs. A.A. Hart, 1; _for Tougaloo U._ 18.00
Kensington. Edward Cowles 5.00
Kent. Cong. Ch. 28.86
Meriden. Miss Alice Porter, _for Indian M._ 5.00
Mystic Bridge. Ladies' Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for Thomasville, Ga._ 2.35
New Britain. Rev. J.W. Cooper, D.D., _for Tougaloo U._ 5.00
New Canaan. W.H.M. Soc. of Cong. Ch. _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._ 5.00
New Haven. Church of the Redeemer, 100; Mrs. S.A. Thomas, 5 105.00
New Haven. L.M. Law, _for Indian Sch'p_ 25.00
New Haven. Mrs. Henry Farnam, 25; Mrs. J.F. Douglass, 3; Mrs. J.H.
Fog, 10; Mrs. R.W. Bolles, 5; _for Indian M._ 43.00
New Haven. Sab. Sch. of College St. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ 15.00
New London. Sab. Sch. First Ch. of Christ, 56.97; Mrs. Anna H.
Perkins, 50; Mrs. Lora E. Learned and Miss Learned, 15; J.C. Learned,
10; _for Indian M._ 131.97
New London. Little Son of Mr. and Mrs. W.S. Chapbell, _for Rosebud
Indian M._ 1.00
Norfolk. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 35; "A Friend," 18; _for Indian
Scholarships_ 53.00
Norfolk. Miss Gertrude Cowles, _for Rosebud Indian M._ 1.50
North Canaan. Pilgrim Ch. 26.70
Norwich. James Dana Colt, _for Rosebud Indian M._ 1.00
Old Saybook. Cong. Ch. 27.76
Plantsville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Atlanta U._ 21.05
Putnam. Second Cong. Ch. 27.27
Redding. "A Friend" 2.50
Ridgefield. Cong. Ch. 2.70
Saybrook. Cong. Conference, by Rev. B. Paine 10.85
Saybrook. Mrs. Giles F. Ward, Case of Books
Southport. "A Friend" 5.00
Stony Creek. Cong. Ch. 1.00
Terryville. Cong. Ch. 47.00
Terryville. Mr. and Mrs. A.S. Gaylord, _for Indian M._ 10.00
Thomaston. Mrs. H.H. Mitchell, _for Student Aid, Straight U._ 20.00
Thomaston. Cong. Ch. 18.50
Thompsonville. Sab. Sch. of First Presb. Ch., _for Student Aid,
Straight U._ $22.13
Tolland. Mrs. J.L. Clough, _for Indian M._ 1.00
Torringford. "A Friend" 1.00
Trumbull. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 12.87
Walllngford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for "Bird's Nest" Indian M._
50.00
Waterbury. Second Cong. Ch. 60.71
Waterbury. Mrs. Mary L. Mitchell, 75; Israel Holmes, 5; _for Indian
M._ 80.00
Waterbury. H.W. Scoville, 10; Mrs. H.M. Peck, 6; Miss K.L. Peck, 5;
_for Tougaloo U._ 20.00
Wauregan. Cong. Ch. 20.00
Westchester. "Christian Bees," Bbl. of C., _for Jellico, Tenn._
West Haven. Mrs. Emeline Smith 10.00
West Winsted. T.C. Davis, 5; Mrs. A.O. Davis, 5 10.00
Wethersfield. Sab. Sch. Class, by Frances S. Shedd, _for Indian M._
10.00
Wethersfield. Emma L. Harris' S.S. Class, _for Rosebud Indian M._ 3.50
Windsor. First Cong. Ch. 50.00
Windsor Locks. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._
25.00
---- "A Friend in Conn.," _for Beach Inst., Savannah, Ga._ 75.00
---- "Plantsville," _for Tougaloo U._ 20.00
Women's Home Missionary Union of Conn., by Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, Sec.
_for Conn. Ind. Sch., Ga._:
Sheffield. Y.L.H.M. Circle, 12.13 12.13

   NEW YORK, $3,371.16.

Albany. Chas. A. Beach 40.00
Astoria. Miss Frances W. Blackwell, _for Indian M._ 2.00
Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch. 60.09
Brooklyn. Rossiter W. Raymond, 50; Mrs. H.P. Ludlam, 20; Mrs. G.W.
Tallman, 5; _for Atlanta U._ 75.00
Brooklyn. Miss M.A. Hall's Sab. Sch. Class, 6.60 _for the poor_; 3
_for Student Aid_; Mrs. Hall, 3; Miss Carrie Strong, 1; Miss Flossie
Bingham, 1; _for Williamsburg, Ky._ 14.60
Brooklyn. Rev. S.B. Halliday, Pkg. Books, etc.
Buffalo. Mrs. Wm. G. Bancroft, _for Indian M._ 100.00
Buffalo. Miss Fannie Skinner, Box of C., _for Macon, Ga._
Canastota. Rev. W.W. Warner 12.25
Danby. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of Goods, _for Jellico, Tenn._
Deansville. Cong. Ch. 10.00
Fairport. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ 18.95
Fredonia. T.S. Hubbard, _for Lincoln Mem. Parish, Washington, D.C._
25.00
Gloversville. Cong. Ch., ad'l. 11.00
Goshen. "A Friend," 1 _for Atlanta U._, 1 _for Marie Adlof Schp. Fund_
2.00
Jamestown. Mrs. Julia Jones Hall, 2000, ack. in March Missionary,
should read _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Austin, Tex._
Jewett. "Friends." Bbl. of C., _for Greenwood, S.C._
Keene Valley. Cong. Ch. 1.12
Livonia. Y.L.M. Soc. of Pres. Ch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._ 8.00
Marcellus. Mrs. L.F. Hemenway 5.00
Massena. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega, C._ 12.00
Mount Vernon. B.B. Adams, Jr., Pkg of C.
New York. Cornelius Vanderbilt, 1000; Rev. D. Stuart Dodge, 100; D.
Willis James, 100; Hamilton Walls, 60; Hon. John Jay, 25; J. Fred'k
Kernochan, 25; Chas. L. Meade, 25; _for Atlanta U._ 1,325.00
New York. Wm. E. Dodge Educational Fund, 300; Mrs. Melissa P. Dodge,
100; _for Student Aid, Atlanta. U._ 400.00
New York. Gen. Wager Swayne, 120; Alanson Trask, 100; _for Talladega
C_ $220.00
New York. John Dwight, 200; S.T. Gordon, 100; Hon. John Jay, 25 325.00
Pitcher. Cong. Ch. 17.50
Poughkeepsie. Mrs. Anne S. Banfield, (12.25 of which for Indian M.)
24.50
Poughkeepsie. C.C. Moore, _for Talladega C._ 10.00
Rochester. McGuire Bible Class, Central Ch., S.S., _for Student Aid,
Talladega C._ 5.00
Sag Harbor. Geo. B. Brown 1.00
Sherburne. Sab. Sch. of First Cong Ch., _for Talladega C._ 24.11
Syracuse. Plym. Cong. Ch. 103.54
Wading River. Cong. Ch. 12.00
Waverly. Mission Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ 5.00
West Camden. Miss Nancy Curtiss, 1.50; Miss Elizabeth W. Curtiss, 1
2.50
Westmoreland. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. 3.00
Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y., by Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treas., _for
Woman's Work_:
Albany. Aux. 25.00
Binghamton. H.M. Soc., to const. MRS. C.E. WELCH and MISS LIZZIE
HAMILTON L.M.'s 60.00
Brooklyn. Willing Aid Soc. of Puritan Ch., to const. MRS. LEROY T.
SMITH and MRS. SARAH B. STANCHFIELD L.M.'s 60.00
Canastota. Mrs. W.W. Warner 1.00
New York. H.S.C. 25.00
Riverhead. Ladies' H.M. Soc. 25.00
Warsaw. "Earnest Workers" 50.00
-------- 246.00
--------
$3,121.16

     LEGACY.

New York. Trustees Estate of Wm. E. Dodge, _for Theo. Student,
Talladega C._ 250.00
--------
$3,371.16

   NEW JERSEY, $193.39.

Chester. "A Friend"                                 5.00
East Orange. F.W. Van Wagenen, _for Marion, Ala._  25.00
Manchester. Cong. Ch.                               6.00
Newark. C.S. Halnes                                30.00
Newfield. Cong. Ch.                                24.50
Orange Valley. Cong. Ch.                          102.89

   PENNSYLVANIA, $84.00.

Bradford. Charles E. Webster 4.00
Cambridge. First Cong. Ch. 5.00
Neath. Cong. Ch. 5.00
Ridgway. Young People's Bible Class, by Minnie J. Kline, _for Oaks,
N.C._ 5.00
Scrangon. Plym. Cong. Ch. 25.00
Scranton. Mrs. Jane L. Eynon, _for Indian Sch'p_ 40.00

   OHIO, $264.36.

Alliance. Sab. Sch. of Welsh Cong. Ch. 5.00
Bryan. S.E. Blakeslee 5.00
Canfield. Cong. Ch. 6.13
Castalia. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. 9.32
Dover. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch., _for Fisk U._ 20.00
Elyria. Cong. Ch., 3, and Sab. Sch., 6, _for Williamsburg, Ky._ 9.00
Jersey. Mrs. Charlotte F. Slough and C. Fred Slough 5.00
Madison. Central Cong. Ch. 48.00
Mansfield. F.E. Tracy, _for Student Aid, Tillotson C. & N. Inst._
37.05
North Ridgeville. Cong. Ch. $5.87
North Ridgeville. Miss M.M. Lickwish, _for Student Aid, Williamsburg,
Ky._ 4.25
Oberlin. Mrs. Maria Godell Frost 2.00
Rockport. Mrs. Carrie S. Bassett 4.50
Sandusky. First Cong. Ch., 19.05; Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 17.73
36.78
Toledo. W.M.U. Central Cong. Ch,. _for Woman's Work_ 20.00
Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. Phebe A. Crafts, Treas.,
_for Woman's Work_:
Columbus. Eastwood Church L.M.S. 10.00
Conneaut. Cong. S.S. Mission Band, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ 5.00
Medina. Primary S.S. Class 0.50
-------- 15.50
--------
$233.40

     LEGACY.

Oberlin. Estate of Henry Cowles, D.D., Royalty on Commentary    30.96
                                                             --------
                                                              $264.36

   ILLINOIS, $718.14.

Aurora. First Cong. Ch. 47.31
Batavia. Y.P. Miss'y Soc. 10.00
Chicago. First Cong. Ch. 153.81
Evanston. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Fisk U. Schp._ 52.36
Forest. Cong. Ch. 16.70
Galesburg. First Ch. of Christ, 46.14 and Sab. Sch., 13.44 59.58
Harvard. Young People's Miss'y Soc. 7.05
Joy Prairie. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ 13.00
Lisbon. Gilman Kendall, 1; Mrs. L.M. Kendall, 1 2.00
Lombard. Ladies, _for Mobile, Ala._ 8.00
Peoria. Mrs. John L. Griswold, 100; Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
25.50; _for Fisk U._ 125.50
Peoria. S.S. Class, _for Mobile, Ala._ 5.00
Princeton. Mrs. P.B. Corss 20.00
Ridge Prairie. Rev. A. Kern 1.00
Summer Hill. Cong. Ch. 5.00
Thomasboro. "R" 3.00
Tolono. Mrs. L. Haskell 10.00
---- "Hapland" 100.00
Woman's Home Missionary Union of Ill., Mrs. B.F. Leavitt, Treas., _for
Woman's Work_:
Alton. W.H.M.U. 9.00
Ashkum 0.94
Chicago. Leavitt St. Ch. 1.39
McLean. W.H.M.U. 10.00
Morris 10.00
Oak Park. Ladies' Benev. Circle 16.00
Payson 1.00
Providence 8.00
Rockford. Second Ch. 4.00
Rockford. W.H.M.U. of Second Ch. 2.50
Sycamore. W.H.M.U. 0.25
Toulon 0.75
Waukegan. Miss Knight 3.50
Wilmette 1.00
---- 78.83

   MICHIGAN, $398.54.

Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch.                47.50
Augusta. First Cong. Ch.                   2.33
Calumet. Cong. Ch.                       169.83
Detroit. Edward Hall, _for Athens, Ala._  10.00
Galesburg. P.H. Whitford                 102.24
New Baltimore. Cong. Church               17.80
Olivet. Cong. Ch.                         32.84

   WISCONSIN, $470.58.

Baraboo. Cong. Ch.                                     2.50
Clinton. Cong. Ch.                                     2.33
Fulton. Cong. Ch.                                      6.58
Columbus. Cong. Ch.                                   $1.20
Elkhorn. Cong. Ch.                                    10.30
Fulton. Cong. Ch.                                      6.58
Green Bay. Pkg. Basted Work, _for Mobile, Ala._
Hartford. First Cong Ch. and Soc.                     40.00
Menomonie. John H. Knapp                             300.00
Paris and Bristol. Cong. Ch., _for Freight_            0.70
Platteville. Cong. Ch., 26.35; Y.P.S.C.E., 2          28.35
Paririe du Chien. Cong. Ch.                            4.00
Racine. E.B. Kilbourne                                15.00
Rio. Cong. Ch.                                         2.60
Stockbridge. Cong. Ch.                                10.00
Sun Prairie. Cong Ch.                                  3.67
Tomah. Cong. Ch.                                       1.00
Trempealeau. Cong. Ch.                                 4.20
Union Grove. Cong. Ch.                                 2.78
Waukesha. Vernon Tichenor                              5.00
Waupun. Cong. Ch., 15.40; Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 10  25.40
West Salem. Cong. Ch.                                  3.00
Wyocena. Cong. Ch.                                     1.97

   IOWA, $319.31.

Ames. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Savannah, Ga._
Atlantic. Cong. Ch. 28.14
Belle Plaine. JAMES P. HENRY, to const. himself L.M. 30.00
Cedar Rapids. Rev. C.H. Moore 2.00
Cherokee. "A Friend," to const. J.A. RISLEY, G.T. FOSTER, JAMES O.
DONNELL, JOHN P. DICKEY and W.T. BURROUGHS L. M's 150.00
Miles. Cong. Ch. 12.05
Moravia. Miss O. Hoffman 0.50
Newton. First Cong. Ch., 17; Mrs. S.S. Derbyshire, 2 19.00
Ricevllle. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Freight_ 3.00
Webster City. "Friends," 4, and Bbl. of Goods, _for Pleasant Hill,
Tenn._ 4.00
Woman's Home Missionary Union of Iowa, _for Woman's Work_:
Anamosa. W.H.M.U. 10.00
Almora. W.H.M.U. 1.00
Council Bluffs. W.M.S. 10.00
Decorah. W.H.M.U. 25.00
Dubuque. S.S. 7.00
Mount Pleasant. W.H.M.U. 5.80
Red Oak. L.M.S. 10.00
Rockford. W.H.M.U. 1.82
-------- 70.62

   MINNESOTA, $570.94.

Ada. Cong. Ch. 5.79
Cannon Falls. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._
25.00
Hamilton. Cong. Ch. 15.85
Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., 66.53; Vine Cong. Ch., 16.95; Lyndale Cong.
Ch., 15.85 99.33
Paynesville. Cong. Ch. 12.55
Rochester. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. 4.85
Stillwater. Rev. Wm. Boutwell, _for Indian M._ 5.00
Zumbrota. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. J.B. LOCKE and A.B. FOLSOM L.M.'s
17.10
---- "Minnesota Friends," _for Atlanta U._ 200.00
Minnesota Woman's Home Missionary Society, by Mrs. C.N. Cross, Treas.,
_for Woman's Work_:
Austin. W.M.S. 2.95
Elk River. W.M.S. 8.25
Glynton. W.M.S. 10.00
Marshall. W.M.S. 14.00
Minneapolis. W.H.M.S. of Plym. Ch., to const. MRS. S.R. SYKES and MISS
SELMA JOHNSON L.M.'s 74.17
Minneapolis. Y.L.M.S. of Plym. Ch. 8.60
Minneapolis. W.M.S. of Como Ave. Ch. $1000
Minneapolis. Children's M.B. of Pilgrim Ch. 2.50
Rochester. Whatsoever Club 15.00
Saint Paul. W.H.M.S. of Plym. Ch. 25.00
" Lend a Hand Soc., Plym. Ch. 10.00
Worthington. W.M.S. 5.00
-------- 185.47

   MISSOURI, $10.25.

Lamar. Cong. Ch.                 2.25
Saint Louis. Hyde Park Cong. Ch. 8.00

   KANSAS, $23.65.

Boling. Prof. L.A. Stone 3.00
Osawatomie. C.S. and M.E. Adair, 3, Rev. S.L. Adair, 2, _for Atlanta,
U._ 5.00
Sedgwick. Plym. Cong. Ch. 1.00
Wabaunsee. First Ch. of Christ 10.65
Wakefield. Mrs. M.L. Mason 4.00

   DAKOTA, $20.00.

Elk Point. Cong. Ch. 10.00
Sioux Falls. Mr. and Mrs. E.C. Johnson, _for Student Aid,
Williamsburg, Ky._ 10.00

   NEBRASKA, $46.03.

Omaha. First Cong, Ch., 38.79; Hillside Cong. Ch., 4.55 43.34
Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                                       2.69

   ARKANSAS, $11.30.

Little Rock. First Cong. Ch.                                         6.30
Little Rock. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._
5.00

   WASHINGTON TERRITORY, $25.00.

Skokomish. Cong. Ch.                                15.00
Seattle. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Athens, Ala._ 10.00

   CALIFORNIA, $10.00.

Los Angeles. "R.P.A. and Wife" 10.00

   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $17.00.

Washington. Miss James, 5; Minnie S. Cook, 2, _for Lincoln Mem.
Parish, Washington_ 7.00
Washington. Lincoln Mem. Ch. 10.00

   KENTUCKY, $249.55.

Lexington. Tuition      213.55
Williamsburg. Cong. Ch.  36.00

   TENNESSEE, $1,088.44.

Grand View. Tuition                     60.00
Helenwood. John Frye                     2.00
Jonesboro. Tuition, 23.10; Rent, 4.50   27.60
Memphis. Tuition                       408.70
Nashville. Tuition. 577.14; Rent, 6.50 583.64
Pleasant Hill. From sale Bbl. of Holly   6.50

   NORTH CAROLINA, $193.20.

Pekin. Cong. Ch.                                 1.00
Salem. Cong. Ch.                                 4.70
Troy. Cong. Ch.                                  1.00
Wilmington. Tuition                            176.50
Wilmington. Miss H.L. Fitts, _for Student Aid_  10.00

   SOUTH CAROLINA, $227.50.

Charleston. Tuition $221.50
Greenwood. Brewer Normal Sch. 5.00
Millitt. "Little Children in Miss Osceola Pleasant's Sch.," _for Marie
Adlof Sch'p Fund_ 1.00

   GEORGIA, $1,160.09.

Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition                        540.45
Atlanta. "Seven Birthday Offerings," First Cong. Ch.   1.14
Macon. Cong. Ch., 1, and Sab. Sch., 1                  2.00
Marietta. Cong. Ch., 1, and Sab. Sch., 1               2.00
McIntosh. Tuition                                     49.00
Savannah. Tuition                                    214.00
Savannah. Miss A.D. Gerrish                           23.50
Thomasville. Tuition                                  62.95
Woodville. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                           2.60

   ALABAMA, $510.90.

Athens. Tuition                                  70.45
Marion. Tuition                                 107.95
Mobile. Tuition                                 212.50
Selma. Rent                                     100.00
Talladega. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., _for Indian M._  20.00

   FLORIDA, $24.05.

Altona. J.S. Blackman      3.00
Saint Augustine. E. Sabin  5.05
Winter Park. Cong. Ch.    16.00

   LOUISIANA, $320.50.

New Orleans. Tuition 320.50

   MISSISSIPPI, $149.85.

Salem. Cong. Ch., Christmas Gift        1.00
Tougaloo. Tuition, 139.85; Rent, 9.60 148.85

   TEXAS, $122.00.

Austin. Tuition 122.00

   INCOMES, $485.00.

Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                  355.00
Belden Scholarship Fund, _for Talladega C._  30.00
C.P. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._            50.00
General Endowment Fund                       50.00

   BULGARIA, $8.00.

Samokov. Pilgrim 8.00

   AFRICA, $10.00.

Kambini, Inhambane. Rev. B.F. Ousley      10.00
                                     ==========
Donations                            $15,870.30
Legacies                                 630.96
Incomes                                  485.00
Tuition                                3,777.39
Rents                                    120.60
                                       --------
Total for March                      $20,884.26
Total from Oct. 1 to March 31        130,976.15
                                       ========

   FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,

Subscriptions for March   $84.78
Previously acknowledged   562.50
                        --------
Total                    $647.28

  *     *     *     *     *

H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,

56 Reade St., N.Y.
{146}

  *     *     *     *     *

TUXEDO TRADEMARK.

Early attention is called to our Knitted Suit, "The TUXEDO," for
Ladies', Misses' and Children's wear. No other suit ever sold has, in
so short a time, become so universal a favorite. These Knitted Suits
are not only the most comfortable and pleasant to wear, but are the
most becoming and graceful in appearance.

For sale in New York only by

JAMES McCREERY & CO.

BROADWAY and ELEVENTH ST.

  *     *     *     *     *

Liquid Cottage Colors.

The best MIXED PAINTS manufactured. Guaranteed to give perfect
satisfaction if properly applied. They are _heavy bodied_, and for
work that does not require an extra heavy coat, they can be thinned
(with our Old Fashioned Kettle-boiled Linseed Oil) and still cover
better than most of the mixed paints sold in the market, many of which
have so little stock in them that they will not give a good solid
coat.

Some manufacturers of mixed paints direct NOT to rub out the paint,
but to FLOW it on; the reason being that if such stuff were rubbed out
there would be but little left to cover, would be transparent. Our
Cottage Colors have great strength or body, and, like any good paint,
should be worked out well under the brush. The covering property of
this paint is so excellent as to allow this to be done.

Put up for shipment as follows: In 3-gal. and 5-gal. bailed buckets,
also barrels; in cans of 1/8, 1/4, 1/2, 1-gal and 2-gal. each.

Sample Cards of Colors, Testimonials and prices sent on application to

Chicago White Lead & Oil Co.,

Cor. Green & Fulton Streets,

CHICAGO, ILL.

  *     *     *     *     *

6%, 7%.

THE AMERICAN

INVESTMENT CO.

OF EMMETTSBURG, IOWA,

with a PAID-UP CAPITAL of $600,000, SURPLUS $75,000, offers First
Mortgage Loans drawing SEVEN per cent., both Principal and Interest
FULLY GUARANTEED. Also 6 per cent, ten-year Debenture Bonds, secured
by 105 per cent. of First Mortgage Loans held in trust by the
MERCANTILE TRUST COMPANY, New York. 5 per cent certificates of deposit
for periods under one year

7 2/3% CAN BE REALIZED BY CHANGING 4 Per Ct. Government Bonds into 6
Per Cent. Debentures.

Write for full information and reference to the Company at

150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

A.L. ORMSBY, Vice-President and Gen. Manager

  *     *     *     *     *

MUSIC IN THE SPRING

There are yet some weeks of cool weather in which to prepare and
practice music for the concluding concerts and festivals of the
season.

It is quite time to send for our complete and rich lists of EASTER
MUSIC

Now let girls and boys begin to practice the sweet CANTATAS--VOICES OF
NATURE, or FOREST JUBILEE BAND, or MERRY COMPANY, or NEW FLORA'S
FESTIVAL; each 40 cents, or $3.60 per dozen.

Pupils of the higher schools will like DRESS REHEARSAL (50c., or $4.50
per doz.), NEW FLOWER QUEEN (60c., or $5.40 per doz.), or HAYMAKERS
($1.00, or $9.00 per doz.)

Fine Cantatas of moderate difficulty for adults are: HEROES OF '76
($1.00), HERBERT AND ELSA (75c.), JOSEPH'S BONDAGE ($1.00), REBECCA
(65c.). RUTH AND BOAZ (65c.), WRECK OF HESPERUS (35c.), FAIR MELUSINA
(75c.), BATTLE OF HUNS (80c.). Send for lists.

For male Quartets and Choruses:

SANGERFEST ($1.38), MALE VOICE GLEE BOOK ($1.00), EMERSON'S QUARTETS
AND CHORUSES (60 cts.), EMERSON'S MALE VOICE GEMS ($1.00).

_Mailed for the Retail Price._

_Oliver Ditson & Co., Boston._

C.H. DITSON & CO., 867 Broadway, New York.

  *     *     *     *     *

  Footnote 1: Deceased.






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 42, NO. 05, MAY, 1888 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

