Produced from page scans provided by Cornell University.






{145}

                         The American Missionary

     *     *     *     *     *


Vol. XLII. June, 1888. No. 6.

     *     *     *     *     *


CONTENTS

   EDITORIAL
        FINANCIAL
        A NOBLE WORD FROM THE OHIO CONGREGATIONAL ASSOCIATION
        FACTS AND FIGURES
        THE COLOR-LINE QUESTION: WHAT IS IT?
        PARAGRAPHS
        FROM ADDRESS OF REV. E.T. FLEMING OF GEORGIA
        A STRIKING STATEMENT
        MISAPPLIED BENEFACTIONS
        IN MEMORIAM
        THE RADICAL FORCES OF CHRISTIANITY, AS EXHIBITED IN THE WORK
          OF THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION. By Rev. J.W. Cooper,
          D.D.
   THE SOUTH.
        NOTES IN THE SADDLE
        THE ALABAMA ASSOCIATION
        TEMPERANCE WORK IN OUR SCHOOLS
   THE INDIANS.
        LETTER FROM AN INDIAN CHIEF IN DAKOTA
   THE CHINESE.
        EVANGELISTIC WORK
        CHINESE GRATITUDE
   BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.
        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF ALABAMA
        LESSON LEAVES
        WOMAN'S WORK IN THE SOUTH
   RECEIPTS

     *     *     *     *     *


New York.
Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance. Published by the American
Missionary Association.
Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.
Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

     *     *     *     *     *


{146}

AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

     *     *     *     *     *


PRESIDENT,

------ ------

_Vice-Presidents._

Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.

Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.

Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.

Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.

Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.

_Corresponding Secretaries._

Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

_Treasurer._

H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

_Auditors._

PETER McCARTEE.

CHAS. P. PEIRCE.

_Executive Committee._

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.

ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.

_For Three Years._

LYMAN ABBOTT,

A.S. BARNES,[1]

J.R. DANFORTH,

CLINTON B. FISK,

ADDISON P. FOSTER,

_For Two Years._

S.B. HALLIDAY,

SAMUEL HOLMES,

SAMUEL S. MARPLES,

CHARLES L. MEAD,

ELBERT B. MONROE,

_For One Year._

J.E. RANKIN,

WM. H. WARD,

J.W. COOPER,

JOHN H. WASHBURN,

EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

_District Secretaries._

Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston._

Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D., 151 _Washington Street, Chicago_.

_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON,

_Secretary of Woman's Work._

Miss D.E. EMERSON, 56 _Reade Street, N.Y._

     *     *     *     *     *


  COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to
the Editor, at the New York Office.

  DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A
payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

  FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

     *     *     *     *     *


{147}

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

     *     *     *     *     *


                     Vol. XLII. May, 1888. No. 5.

     *     *     *     *     *


 AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

     *     *     *     *     *


This Number of the Missionary will reach our friends, the pastors and
the churches, about the first of June, one month before the usual
vacation time sends many of the pastors to their much-needed summer
rest, and when the churches enter upon the months of small
congregations. We wish to remind our friends that the expenditures of
a missionary society have no vacation, and to ask them that in this
remaining month, special efforts be made to prepare us for the months
when there is the usual outflow with only a small stream coming in.

The showing of our receipts is favorable. For the seven months to
April 30th, they aggregate $158,921.20, an increase of $5,082.75 over
last year. The increase in collections and donations is $9,241.84, but
there is a decrease in legacies of $4,159.09, leaving the net increase
as above stated. On the other hand, however, the expenditure that has
been absolutely demanded by our growing work has been $23,778.24 over
the receipts. Our committee has denied many appeals pressed upon it,
from the workers in the field, for needed growth and strengthening;
but some calls have come with such urgency to save the work already in
hand, that it felt constrained to grant the additional appropriations,
and we are very confident that if our constituents had been present,
they, too, would have concurred heartily and unanimously in the votes.

We might reasonably hope that this debtor balance would be wiped out
during the five months of our fiscal year yet before us, but there is
a special reason for anxiety that it should soon be materially
reduced. It is at this time that we are compelled to plan the work,
and make estimates, for the next fiscal year, beginning October 1st.
We are now endeavoring to cut down these estimates to the lowest
possible point, but if, before the close of June, there shall be no
marked reduction of this balance, we shall be obliged to cut still
further, even to the arresting or crippling of work already begun. We
ask our friends to rally to the rescue.

     *     *     *     *     *


{148}

  A NOBLE WORD FROM THE OHIO CONGREGATIONAL ASSOCIATION.

 REPORT ON THE A.M.A. BY REV. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D.

The work of the American Missionary Association appeals to the
churches of Ohio with cumulative urgency. "A.M.A.," as our stalwart
brother Pike used to say, are letters that stand for the darkened
races of this continent--the American, the Mongolian and the African.
To the Christian people of America, these tribes are entrusted; for
their enlightenment and Christianization, we are responsible. The
Government at Washington can do something toward protecting these
people in their political rights; but there is very little, after all,
that can be done for any people which does not know how to assert and
maintain its own rights. Liberty can never be a gratuity, it must
always be an achievement. Peoples, as well as individuals, must work
out their own salvation. The Negro at the South is cheated out of his
political rights, simply because he does not know how to claim them;
the Indian on the plains is defrauded of his property, because he does
not know how to protect himself. No matter how favorable the laws may
be to these hapless people, they will be oppressed and impoverished
and kept in a condition of semi-slavery, unless they know how to use
the laws in their own advantage. Education, therefore, is the only
effectual remedy for their wrongs. To awaken their minds, to arouse
the energies of hope, to show them that they are made in God's image
and that they have a right to all the liberties of the laws of God, is
the only way to complete and secure their emancipation from bondage
and from barbarism.

This is the work to which the American Missionary Association calls us
all. It is our just pride as Congregationalists that through this
Association more has been done for the true enfranchisement of the
freedmen than through any other agency, and it is our duty to see that
this great work, in which we have borne so large and honorable a part,
halt not nor slacken in its energy because of our failure to keep its
treasury replenished and its faithful laborers re-enforced and
supported by our gifts and our prayers.

     *     *     *     *     *


  FACTS AND FIGURES.

The sum total of all the contributions of all the benevolent agencies
for the evangelization and education of the Negro in the South, is
seventeen cents per year for each person.

This seventeen cents includes whatever is done in missionary colleges
and in all educational missions, as well as in the direct church work.

In twenty-one years from 1841 to 1861 there were twenty-one crops of
cotton raised by slave labor, which aggregated 58,441,906 bales.
{149}

In the twenty-one years from 1865 to 1885 there were twenty-one crops
of cotton which aggregated 93,389,031 bales.

That is, by free labor there was an excess over the productions of
slave labor of 34,947,125 bales, or nearly 35,000,000 bales. The value
of 35,000,000 bales of cotton produced by free labor in excess of the
product of slave labor cannot have been less than $2,000,000,000, or
about the full valuation of all the slaves who were made free by the
war, had they been sold at the ruling prices. The gain is due not only
to the emancipation of the blacks, but to the emancipation of the
whites from enforced idleness.

The cotton factories of the world annually require about 12,000,000
bales of cotton, American weight. Good land in Texas produces one bale
to the acre. The world's supply of cotton could be grown on less than
19,000 square miles, or upon an area equal to only seven per cent. of
the area of Texas.

     *     *     *     *     *


  THE COLOR-LINE QUESTION: WHAT IS IT?

1. It is not the question of _social_ equality. No one doubts the
right of individuals, or the family, or the social circle, to draw
their lines of association and fellowship at their own pleasure,
whether at wealth, rank, fashion, talent, or anything else. To
confound this with the real question, is not candid.

2. Still less is it the question of the inter-marriage of the races.
Here, individual preference is undeniable. To claim that this is the
question, and to ask tauntingly: "Do you want your daughter to marry a
_nigger_?" is ungentlemanly and unworthy of an answer.

3. The question is: Shall a line be drawn between the white and black
races, giving rights and privileges in Church and State to the one
race, which are denied to the other, solely because of race or color?
In other words: Shall a line be drawn which shall separate the
Negroes, and assign them as a race to the position of inferiors
irrespective of merit or character, and merely on the ground of race
or color?

To narrow the discussion, we leave out of view the civil or political
aspect of the question and confine ourselves to the religious, and we
propose to give a few illustrations. A Negro in every way qualified,
in character, piety, and intelligence, applies for membership in a
white church. Shall the color-line be drawn and he be refused
admission for no other reason than that he is a Negro? This does not
imply that the whites and blacks should be urged or persuaded to unite
in all churches or in any church. It may be conceded that the blacks
generally do not desire to unite with white churches, and that, in
their present state of culture, it may not always be for their
edification to do so. But where an individual Negro _does_ believe
that it would be for his edification and growth in grace to belong to
a white church, shall the color that God stamped on him, or the race
in which God gave him his birth, be a sufficient reason {150} for
refusing him? The question and the principle apply equally if the
Negro should be given to understand that while he would not actually
be refused admission, yet the preference of the church would be that
he should not apply; nay, we do not see why the principle is not the
same if the well-known attitude of the church on the race question
should be such that the Christian self-respect of the Negro would not
allow him to make the application.

Again, shall colored churches, conferences or presbyteries be formed
on the same territory _in order that_ the colored members may not
unite with the white churches, conferences or presbyteries? Shall a
line be run between the races on the simple ground of race or color,
and irrespective of character, convenience or choice, so that the
Negro as a church member shall not be allowed to choose the church he
shall join, or as a minister the option as to his conference or
presbytery? For one race to demand such a line of separation, is to
consign the other race to a position of inferiority as humiliating as
it is discouraging. Such is the demand of race prejudice, and such the
position of inferiority in which it insists on placing the Negro.
Slavery held the Negro there, and since emancipation, this
race-separation is intended to accomplish the same purpose. The
Southern white man makes no objection to the race or color of the
Negro, but only to his position as an equal. He was not merely
tolerated, he was more than tolerated, as a slave, and he is now as a
servant.

The present controversy in regard to the color-line is calling forth
some frank admissions from intelligent white men at the South. Thus
the Rev. Wm. H. Campbell, an Episcopal clergyman of South Carolina,
vindicates his refusal to sit in Convention with the Negroes by the
inferiority which the Almighty has stamped upon them. Mr. Campbell
says:

  "The Bishop does not understand or appreciate the reasons why some
  of us cannot, under any circumstances, sit in Convention with
  Negroes. The objections commonly made need not here be referred to.
  The difficulty with some of us is not 'on account of color,' as it
  is usually, but not with strict accuracy, put; for some Negroes are
  as white as some white men, but because they are of an inferior
  race, so made by the Almighty and never intended by him to be put
  on an equality with the white race, in either Church or State."

The question at issue is not one of expediency, but of principle; and,
among Christians, whether in the individual church or the
ecclesiastical body, it is a question of Christian duty to be settled
by the Divine authority of the Master himself. We propose no argument
on the subject, but content ourselves by quoting a few well-known
passages of Scripture, which, though familiar, have lost neither their
significancy nor their authority. In the end, the voice of God must be
decisive.

  "And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all
  the face of the earth."

  "God hath showed me that I should call no man common or unclean."

{151}

  "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in
  every nation, he that feareth Him and worketh righteousness is
  accepted with Him."

  "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free,
  there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ."

  "Inasmuch as ye have not done it unto one of the least of these, my
  brethren, ye have not done it unto me."

     *     *     *     *     *


Secretary Roy, in the _Advance_, controverts the statement of the
_Herald and Presbyter_, that the Congregationalists have come to
consent to separate ecclesiastical bodies on the ground of color. Dr.
Roy supposes that this conclusion may have been jumped at because of
the formation of a new Congregational Association in Georgia, which is
an outcome from the Congregational Methodist churches there. The
_Interior_, evidently with gladness, makes the same assertion. The
_Christian Union_ replies to this, saying, "We do not think this is
true; _but, if it is, so much the worse for the Congregationalists!_"
We may say with Dr. Roy, that nothing is more certain than that in the
New Empire that is growing before our eyes, the Congregational
churches of this century will not turn towards the dark ages, and will
not put themselves to shame by refusing to fellowship with the
disciples of Christ on the ground of caste. Such a proposition would
have the scorn of our National Council.

The Christianity of our churches will not fall behind the humanity of
Victor Hugo, who said, "I have had in my hand the gloved and white
palm of the upper class and the heavy black hand of the lower class,
and have recognized that both are the hands of man."

The Congregational churches may not be quoted as countenancing this
great wickedness against God and man.

     *     *     *     *     *


  FROM ADDRESS OF REV. E.T. FLEMING OF GEORGIA, IN THE BROADWAY TABERNACLE
  OF NEW YORK.

"I suppose it will be necessary to tell you that I am a Negro, that I
was born a slave. We are struggling against difficulties. We meet with
a great deal of opposition. A case comes to mind which shows something
of this opposition. I went out into what we call the Bottom District.
The church there was dirty. I went to work and got a sufficient amount
of money to buy a barrel of lime. It took me a week to get enough
money to buy a barrel of lime. Another brother and myself got the
barrel of lime there on a wheel-barrow. We whitewashed the church
inside and out, and finished the job about half-past eleven o'clock.
It was too late to return to the city, and we agreed to sleep in the
church. The next morning, I was surprised to hear a great noise on the
outside, and opening the door, looked out and saw a lean, lank, white
woman. She was calling to her daughter, "Louisa, Louisa, come here."
Her daughter {152} came to her mother and said, "My ---- ----, they
have painted the nigger church white. We must put a stop to that."
They said we would have to move the church, on the ground that they
were not going to stand anything of that kind. These are the things
that meet us in opposition there. I was myself refused admittance to a
Gospel Tent where a distinguished evangelist from the North was
preaching."

     *     *     *     *     *


  A STRIKING STATEMENT.

In one of the hotels in Columbia, South Carolina, among the
collections of an excellent library, is a book which bears the seal of
the State of South Carolina, giving much statistical information as to
the geological character of the State, its agricultural resources, its
mineral products and the peculiarities of its population. From its
pages, the following extract is taken, which is reproduced here for
its suggestiveness. It seems incredible, and yet the authority is
wholly Southern and has the imprint of the State. It is as follows:

  "No effort adequate to even an approximate determination
  statistically of the intermixture of the White and Negro races has
  as yet been undertaken. Mr. Patterson, quoted in an authoritative
  work upon '_The Resources and Population of South Carolina_,' and
  published by the _State Board of Agriculture_ in 1883, as one who
  has given much attention to the subject, says, even now there are
  no longer Negroes. One-third has a large infusion of white blood,
  another third has less, but still some, and of the other third it
  would be difficult to find an assured specimen of pure African
  blood. This, continues the report, is a startling statement; but in
  the absence of statistics, whoever puts it to the test among his
  Negro acquaintance will be surprised at the degree in which it
  conforms to the facts. If the lineage of those Negroes whose color
  and features seem most unmistakably to mark them as of purely
  African descent, be traced, indubitable evidence may often be
  obtained of white parentage more or less remote."

     *     *     *     *     *


  MISAPPLIED BENEFACTIONS.

The judicious placing of benefaction is a large part of the good of
it. Is it wisely located? Will it be permanent? Will it be
reproductive? Will it be in the hands of persons suitably responsible
for the administration of it? Will it be under a fitting supervision?
The cause appeals to sympathy; does it also carry the mark of good
judgment? For lack of this double endorsement, not a little of
generous giving is thrown away. It is a fine piece of romance; does it
proffer a sufficient security upon the proffered investment of the
Lord's money?

A worthy Christian woman brings the scheme. It is laid upon the
mountains of East Tennessee, thrust up into notoriety by the writing
of Charles Egbert Craddock. A lady of faith and hope and energy, {153}
proposes to build up an industrial farm-school of high quality for the
neglected girls of that mountain district. She has already been
teaching a common-school among them. She comes up to a city of New
England. She lays her plan before some of the noble women there. They
take it up without further inquiry as to the feasibility of the
undertaking. With their first contributions an old worn-out farm is
bought in the lady's name, and in the cheap farm-house a small school
is opened. The location is in an out-of-the-way neighborhood, three or
four miles from the little, old, tumble-down county seat. Now a fine
building is to be secured. The lady patrons raise their offerings up
to six thousand dollars. Fine architectural plans are devised at the
North. Meantime, speculators on the ground, who for a few cents an
acre have bought up a great quantity of land adjoining and would be
glad to sell it at a dollar an acre, have donated a hundred acres,
more or less, to the school. On this tract the building is located and
goes forward. The frame is put up and pretty much enclosed. For want
of money the enterprise comes to a stand, and now for these four years
the stranded structure has been taking damage from the storms.

The place has been visited repeatedly by the superintendents of the
A.M.A., to find the state of the case and to see if anything could be
done to utilize the partial plant. The pastor of the lady donors
became interested to save the investment through the A.M.A., or to
stop the pouring of more funds into the venture, but after all his
correspondence and personal conference, he found that, if the whole
property were to be offered to the Association, it could not afford to
accept it and undertake to carry forward the school. It already has a
prosperous academy in that county and another in an adjoining county,
and these, wisely located in congenial communities, are all that is
needed for those and for contiguous counties. There is no way to
utilize it, Alas, "Wherefore this waste?"

An Orphanage for colored children is a tempting charity. The A.M.A
early undertook such work. At Wilmington, N.C., and at Atlanta, Ga.,
it bought lands and erected ample buildings, but the experiment
satisfied the authorities that the Association was not called to that
department of work. The children's god-fathers and god-mothers, in
devotion to their covenant, or grand-parents from personal interest,
would soon be taking them out, and others having care of them would
call them out as soon as, by some growth and training, the scholars
were made profitable for work, and so those properties were sold and
the avails put into the ordinary educational process. Then the
conclusion was reached that this was the obligation of the local
communities, and _not of foreign charity_. According to this idea, an
Orphanage in a Southern city, undertaken not by the patronage or
approval of the A.M.A., though made to appear so because the
originator had been under its commission there as a missionary, has
been transferred to a local board and to the support of the city {154}
and county. That is as it should be. Those local authorities ought to
take care of their own orphans, and not appeal to the charity of the
North to relieve them of their proper burdens of humanity.

Another so-called Orphanage at still another Southern city, started as
an individual venture. It was allowed for a short time to have a
conditional endorsement from the A.M.A., which was soon withdrawn and
the enterprise disowned. This has swallowed up thousands of dollars of
the money of benevolence, and yet it has all the time been a sham and
a falsehood. There was nothing of it. When a lady newspaper
correspondent called to visit the institution, ten or a dozen children
from a neighboring private school were borrowed and paraded as
orphans, when at the time there were only two little children in the
concern, and they had grandparents living near and abundantly able to
take care of them. "Wherefore this waste?"

In yet another Southern city, a couple of young ladies start a school.
Having once been under commission of the A.M.A., in connection with
its institutions, they appear to many to have its endorsement and they
make appeal to its constituents. Money comes along for a work
irresponsibly begun and without supervision. Only a year goes by
before they appeal by their leaflet-paper for several thousand dollars
to buy land and build a home and school property. Who but they shall
hold and own the property? Whose shall it be when they marry or grow
weary of the work and leave? What protection is there for such
misplaced benefaction?

By no means would the Association seek to interfere with donations to
individuals where the donors investigate for themselves and assume the
responsibility, but it is not fair that we should be held as
apparently responsible for movements that we disown, and it is not
fair to our constituents that we should allow them to remain under the
impression that in giving to irresponsible projects, they are favoring
such as are endorsed by us.

Thirty-five years ago the Congregational Union was initiated in the
Albany Convention on purpose to protect Eastern friends from the
miscellaneous and irresponsible and persistent solicitation for
individual church enterprise. It is the business of that Society to
receive, inspect and decide upon all such applications. Take it away
and the flood gates would be lifted again. No less in the cause of
missionary education is such discretionary service needed.

     *     *     *     *     *


  THE NEGRO QUESTION.

This is the title of a recent brochure by George W. Cable, published
by the American Missionary Association. With the most vigorous and
courageous devotion to the question that "is the gravest in American
affairs," Mr. Cable addresses himself to the problem and to the answer
that should be made to it. His apprehension of injustice is so keen
and true, {155} and his seriousness, in view of the weariness and
offence that the whole subject gives to a great majority of the
people, is so urgent, that the paper has been criticized as
pessimistic, and as an impatient cry against evils that are speedily
being rectified. We may say that the optimistic view of evils never
did much to correct them, and that those who are patient with wrongs
will never create a sentiment against them. To us, this seems the
voice of a prophet pleading for righteousness to man and righteousness
in the land.

     *     *     *     *     *


  OUR WHOLE COUNTRY.

Among the recent issues of the press, none has been more effective and
deservedly popular than the pamphlet entitled, "OUR COUNTRY," written
by our esteemed friend, Rev. Josiah Strong, D.D. It has aroused public
attention in a remarkable degree, and has opened the way for a career
of most promising usefulness to the author.

Our only regret in reading these stirring pages, has arisen from the
fact, that in its survey it leaves almost entirely out of account
nearly one third part of our country, namely, the South, a part, too,
that contains as many elements of future trouble to the nation, and
elements, too, that if properly dealt with, can minister as largely to
the nation's future prosperity, as any other portion. Our object in
penning this item is to suggest that some man of equal diligence in
collecting facts, and of equal skill in handling them, shall write a
book entitled, "Our _Whole_ Country," that shall omit no part of it.

     *     *     *     *     *


  A SAMPLE OF SOUTHERN CHURCH WORK.

The Rev. G.W. McClellan, a graduate of Fisk University and recently a
student at Hartford Theological Seminary, has formed a "_Boys'
Christian Association_" in connection with his church work in
Louisville. The boys meet on Friday evenings for literary exercises,
and the following are some of the questions debated this winter.

1. _Resolved_, That Washington was a greater general than Grant.

2. _Resolved_, That capital punishment ought to be abolished.

3. _Resolved_, That strikes are right and necessary.

4. _Resolved_, That boys, as a rule, after graduation from the High
School, should go to College.

     *     *     *     *     *


  EXTRACTS FROM EXAMINATION PAPERS.

Question. _What was the Dred Scott decision?_

Answer. "The Dred Scott decision declared that slave owners could
carry their slaves into any territory except their own."
{156}

Another Answer. "Dred Scott decision was, that protected tariff should
be kept out of the territories."

Question. _What are ocean currents?_

Answer. "The Ocean currant is a celebrated meal-storm on the coast of
Norway."

     *     *     *     *     *


  A STRAW.

A few days since, there was an examination of candidates for positions
as teachers in the New Orleans public schools. Four of our Straight
University girls presented themselves, three graduates and one an
undergraduate, and all passed the examination, receiving respectively
94, 93, 92 and 87 per cent., and three were at once given good
positions.

     *     *     *     *     *


  IN MEMORIAM.

Another good man has gone to his reward. Rev. Geo. J. Tillotson, who
has perpetuated his name in the Tillotson Institute, Austin, Texas,
died March 29th, at his home in Wethersfield, Conn. His useful life
was spent in that State. He was born in Farmington, Feb. 5, 1805, was
graduated at Yale in 1825, studied theology in the Yale Seminary one
year and at Andover for two years, completing his theological studies
in 1830. He had several long pastorates, which he filled with great
fidelity and success. From 1876 he was not employed as a pastor, but
devoted himself with great assiduity to various modes of promoting the
Redeemer's kingdom. He had practised economy and had the means to
give, and this he did with a discriminating, and yet a liberal, hand.
To the founding of the Tillotson Institute, he gave not only from his
own resources, but devoted his time and energies to collecting funds
from his friends. But his benefactions were not confined to one
object; he had a broad sympathy for every good cause. He was a man of
genial temperament, and closed his useful career after a short illness
in the 84th year of his age.

     *     *     *     *     *


  THE RADICAL FORCES OF CHRISTIANITY, AS EXHIBITED IN THE WORK OF THE
  AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

BY REV. J.W. COOPER, D.D.

The work of Christ is the work of Christianity. By the "radical forces
of Christianity," we mean the simple spirit of the Master, in its
original and energetic operation. We are dealing with no abstractions,
neither are we considering the operation of human agencies. What
Christ was in his earthly ministry, that Christianity is, because of
His living presence {157} in the church to-day. Wherever we discover
the working of those principles which were exemplified in his life,
there He is present in living power, the inspirer of the endeavor, and
the strength of it. The claim that the work of the American Missionary
Association makes upon our attention, may be presented in a variety of
forms. Its work is commended to us, for example, because it is
patriotic, that is, it makes its appeal to our self-interest. The
instinct of self-preservation demands that we sustain it. Four and a
half millions of Negroes in our Southern States are utterly
illiterate. Half that number of Southern whites are in the same
deplorable condition. These men are citizens. They hold the ballot.
Our free institutions are not safe in such hands as these. Education
is an absolute necessity. This wide-spreading and dense ignorance,
among masses of free American people, must be speedily overcome. We do
not wonder, therefore, that Andrew D. White in his scholarly address,
"The Message of the 19th Century to the 20th," puts the education of
the South first among the many great and pressing problems that claim
the attention of statesmen. It is a matter of self-interest and
self-preservation.

This work commends itself, also, because of its justice. It appeals as
a duty, to every enlightened conscience. The ignorance of the Negro,
and the degradation of the Indian, are more our fault than theirs. We
owe it to them, as a matter of simple justice, that we now make
reparation, as best we can, for the wrong done to them in the past. If
we, as a nation, have helped push them down, we ought to help lift
them up. It is a burden which stern justice lays upon us.

But I turn from all such impressive arguments as these, to find
another and altogether different motive to this work, one which the
statesman may consider of little worth, the appeal of which mere
conscience may not feel, but, which to the Christian heart must ever
be more powerful and persuasive than all other motives that can be
named. This work commends itself to us, because it is a Christly work.
The spirit of the Master is in it. The radical forces of Christianity
are exemplified by it. This Society may stand forth before the world
to-day, and without any sacrifice of humility or reverence, opening
the book and finding the place where it is written, it may say, in
concert with the Master himself, "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon
me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor, he
hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim deliverance to
the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord that He might be glorified."
And here is its strongest claim upon our sympathy and support.

That this representation is not an exaggerated one, and that the claim
is in no way over-stated, we shall see more clearly as the comparison
is followed out in detail. The work which this Association has in hand
will {158} bear the test of analysis. It is not only a Christian work,
it is a work which, from the beginning, has called into exercise the
fundamental principles of Christianity. It exemplifies Christianity in
its most original and essential features.

 I.--A RADICAL FAITH.

As I look into this work, the first thing that impresses me is the
faith that inspired it. It was a most sublime undertaking. It began,
so far as relates to its present fields of labor, with the millions of
freedmen just emancipated from two and a half centuries of bondage.
What this bondage signified, this present generation will find it
difficult to realize. For years it had been a crime to teach them the
alphabet. They had been bought and sold like cattle. Their lives were
a daily school in sensual immorality, deceit and dishonesty. Every
manly aspiration, and womanly feeling, was smothered at its birth.
They had come from savagery to slavery, and in a day, without training
or preparation, they were set free. It is no wonder that they were
ignorant, indolent, degraded and despised. As one of their own number
says, "We came into bondage naked and destitute of worldly goods, we
went out of it penniless, homeless and almost characterless." Now it
was this mass of degraded humanity that this Association set itself to
elevate and Christianize, and it did it with a calm assurance and
serene hope which no obstacle has as yet been able to disturb. The
road has been a long and hard one, but it did not anticipate an easy
time or miraculous success. It has met with new and perhaps unexpected
difficulties. It may be that all the workers would say what the
President of Talladega writes in a recent letter, "The magnitude of
the obstacles are more and more real to me as I live and work." But
they still live and they still work, never doubting the final result.
If you want to find men who have undying faith in the future of the
black race, go to those who, in the spirit of their Master, are
toiling night and day, under the commission of this Society, for its
elevation.

In the same spirit, also, this Association has welcomed new labors and
entered into new fields. When Chinamen were to be Christianized,
immediately it had great faith for the Chinese. When the Indian
missions were laid upon it, then it saw wonderful possibilities in the
red man. And now, last of all, when some million or two of
long-forgotten and neglected "Mountain Whites" are brought to its
attention, it sees in these abjectly poor, dispirited and
superstitious people, only another opportunity for elevating humanity,
and proving the power of Christianity to restore the lost manhood of
every race.

These servants of God are not engaged in a forlorn hope. They have
faith. Wherever they work there they expect results, not only in the
saving of individual souls, but in regenerating whole races of men. A
Christian woman, missionary to the poor whites among the mountains of
East {159} Tennessee, under the inspiration of her great faith, writes
home to her friends, "We can almost hear the bells ring in unreared
steeples, and hear the songs from choirs that are as yet totally
oblivious to the spirit of melody, and enter into the heart-worship of
the prayer meetings that are to be when shall have been fulfilled the
prophecy, that 'to the people which sat in darkness and the shadow of
death, light is sprung up'." Such buoyant, hopeful faith as this, so
clear and beautiful in its confidence in the promises of God, is one
of the "radical forces" which command, while they inspire, this holy
work.

 II.--A RADICAL LOVE.

But what may be called the special characteristic of this Society
among missionary organizations doing work in our own land, that which
establishes its special claim upon hearts of Christian people, is the
radical spirit of love there is in it. It exemplifies in a most
practical way, the brotherhood of man. It repudiates caste. It is
absolutely color-blind. It works for the despised. It helps those who
are themselves the most helpless. This is no newly-discovered fact. I
remember the first sermon I ever heard in behalf of this work, more
than twenty years ago; it was drawn from the Parable of the Good
Samaritan. The text was, "Who is my neighbor?" The address of the
honored late President of this Association at the close of the last
Annual Meeting which he attended, was in the trend of this very same
Scripture. "This organization," he said, "is the Good Samaritan,
loving to bestow its aid upon the poorest and most despised, the most
severely wounded races of our country." The sermon, a score of years
ago, told us that our neighbor was the Negro, just then made free. So
said President Washburn, "If you can point out to this organization
any race that needs its assistance, whether colored or white, there is
the legitimate field of this Association."

It would seem that a law so emphatically taught by Jesus Christ as the
common brotherhood of man, and so familiar to the world, would long
ago have been accepted and adopted in the practice of Christian
nations, especially by a Christian Republic within its own borders.
But, instead of that, it is the hardest of all laws for us to learn
and the most difficult of all to put in operation. Our policy toward
the general colored races in this land has been one of cold-hearted
and cruel selfishness. As ex-Senator Brace has said, speaking in
behalf of his own people, "From the red race was taken their lands,
from the yellow their labor, from the black their persons. The red
race was gradually driven toward a setting sun; the yellow race, the
rabble demanded to be driven from the country; the black man was a
slave in chains, with no rights which the Constitution recognized."

These unjust prejudices are by no means altogether a thing of the
past. They are not as violent as they once were, thanks to the
influence {160} of this Association, but they still exist. "Niggers,"
are still ordered out of Southern churches. Many a professed Christian
still wants his Indian "dead." This work has all along been compelled
to fight its way against suspicion, bigotry and hatred; it must do so
still, because it recognizes man as man, whether his skin be white or
black, red or yellow; and, in taking this radical ground, it is
interpreting to the world the benevolent spirit of the Saviour, and is
preparing the way for that universal reign of love on earth which He
came to establish. Such a work as this is the salvation of our
Christianity. Without it, one of the chief evidences for Christianity
would be taken away, and the spirit of it would die. Standing before a
congregation of white men, Negroes and Indians, with a Chinamen or two
to make the tale complete, President Mark Hopkins last May dedicated
the new chapel at Hampton to the worship of Almighty God. He voiced
the sentiment of this whole Association when he said, "Here will be
taught and promoted a Christianity as narrow in its creed as revealed
truth, and as broad in its love as humanity!" "A creed as narrow as
revealed truth." Yes! we want no inspirations from outside the sacred
book. "A love as broad as humanity." By all means, yes! for no smaller
measure will satisfy the demands of that book or fulfil the will of
the Master.

 III.--A RADICAL CONSECRATION.

Another principle required in this work and exemplified by it, is a
thorough-going consecration. The men and women who have taken up this
work, have followed Christ in his self-abnegation. There is no worldly
honor in it. It is not an easy life. You know well enough how these
devoted missionaries have braved social ostracism, and shut themselves
in to their lowly ministry. With the Christly "sympathy of
identification," they have made themselves one with their despised
brethren, bearing their burdens, sharing their privations, stooping to
meet their needs. What almost infinite patience it has sometimes
required, what forbearance and charity, we cannot know, but they have
served willingly and cheerfully, and found the sacrifice to be a joy.
And there are many of them, in school and church and home, in our
Southern land and in the Western wilds, who are serving there in a
spirit of self-abnegation and patient sacrifice, and whom God will
honor. These faithful workers are not martyrs; but there is something
heroic in their lives. It is the heroism of those who lay upon
themselves the lowliest duties, and perform them in the spirit of the
loftiest devotion. The work that calls forth such consecration as
this, so disinterested and sincere, bears its own letter of
commendation. The spirit of Him, who "came to minister, and to give
his life a ransom for many," is exemplified by it.

 IV.--A RADICAL METHOD.

There is one thing more that I would mention. It is the radical {161}
method which this Association has adopted in doing its work. It has
never been satisfied with surface culture. It strikes down to the
roots of character. Not "quantity," but "quality," is manifestly its
motto. As an illustration of intelligent thoroughness in Christian
service, therefore, this Association commends itself to our regard.

A decided advance was marked in missionary work when the church came
to see that not only the conversion of the heathen, but their
establishment in Christian character, was a legitimate object of
missionary endeavor. Francis Xavier in ten years visited fifty
kingdoms and baptized a million converts, but the ten years' labor of
some of our modern missionaries, spent in laying solid foundations and
thoroughly training a few chosen men, may, after all, come to more in
its permanent results upon the world, than all that was done by Rome's
great apostle. Jesus gave the best part of his three years of public
ministry to the training of twelve men. He might have baptised a
million. He preferred to do thorough work with a few. This Association
has acted upon this principle. It has sought to develop manhood and
womanhood after the pattern and by the power that is in Jesus Christ.
It calls to its aid every possible force. It educates the mind, the
heart, the conscience, the hand. It uses the church, the school, the
workshop and the Christian home. Character-building is its vocation,
the foundation Jesus Christ, the superstructure such as should stand
the test of fire. These oppressed races need above all things else
leaders from among themselves. It has been the endeavor of this
Society to furnish them--men and women of such moral and mental
quality as shall be fitted for the responsible position. They have
been taught to think, to work and to live. Because labor is a moral
force in establishing character, industrial education is introduced.
Nothing is too great to be attempted, nothing too trivial to be
omitted, the object always being the substantial development of moral
and Christian character.

Such is this mission. It has gone forth in the spirit of Christ, with
faith and love and consecration, seeking to do an honest work with
thoroughness. God's blessing has been upon it. It has results to show
in the renovated and ennobled lives of thousands who have been the
subjects of its ministry; and its broader influence in the elevation
of the oppressed and despised races, begins even now to be clearly
apparent. It has been a faithful monitor to the churches which have
sustained it, an inspirer of their benevolence, an almoner of their
gifts, and an honor to their name. And beyond all this, standing for
those principles which are most essential and fundamental in
Christianity, it has glorified God by exhibiting to the world the
power of Christian faith and sacrifice. Those who have been bound of
Satan, lo, these many years, are loosed from their bonds and made free
in Christ. War has struck off the chains of human bondage. Love shall
now complete the emancipation.

     *     *     *     *     *


{162}

THE SOUTH.

     *     *     *     *     *


  "NOTES IN THE SADDLE."

BY REV. C.J. RYDER, DISTRICT SECRETARY.

The following, which was taken from the public records of a _white_
school in Tennessee, illustrates the intellectual condition of a
portion of the white citizens of that and the other Southern States.
It also shows what kind of men have charge of public instruction in
some districts throughout the South.

  "TENN July --, 188-.

  "Rulus for scoul No 4.

  Teacher will not low the scoulars to scouful or clime or swhisparn
  in time of Books; the Teacher can ad eney rulus to this he thinks
  needud and eney Larg secular can not comer ounder rulus will have
  to quit the scoul."

These "rulus," as the word is spelled, were signed by two members of
the School Board by whom they were written. How strange, that in
localities in which there is such frightful illiteracy the school
authorities should fail to welcome, with large-hearted cordiality,
teachers who come among them. The white people, as well as the
colored, need missionary schools, as the illiteracy among them is
appalling.

Think of it! Seven-tenths of one per cent. of the native white
population of Massachusetts are illiterate, while twenty-three per
cent. of the native white population of Georgia, and thirty-one per
cent. of the same population of North Carolina are illiterate!! Why
should not Georgia be proud of her educated (?) citizens, and do all
she dare to drive some of the best teachers there are in the State
outside her borders?

     *     *     *     *     *


Right in this connection it would be interesting to read the following
letter. A brief word of history, however, is necessary that it may be
understood. In 1878, a young man, a graduate of one of the leading New
England colleges, enlisted in the great army of A.M.A. teachers. He
was a quiet, unassuming, Christian student. The amazing ignorance of
the Southern people, both white and black, awoke his pity; and his
love, for his Saviour, and for his country, led him to give himself to
this most needy field. He was embarrassed and badgered by those who
ought to have welcomed him, and helped him in his work. This mean and
unworthy opposition with which our A.M.A. teachers are so familiar,
culminated in his case, in a series of letters in which his _life_ was
threatened. It was just before the election of President Cleveland.
There was evidently, a well-matured plan to drive him out of the
community, and to intimidate the Negroes so that they would not dare
to vote. The following was one of these letters:
{163}

  "Mr ---- deer Sir It is for your own good That I write This letter
  to you you are an advocate for Social Equality with the white and
  the Black race and the People are not going to Put up with any Such
  doings and I write you this letter to warn you of The danger and
  the great danger That you are in You must leve The country right
  away for The People have Pledged Them Seves to get you out of the
  contry or Kill you and That in a mity Short time Now as a frend I
  do beg you to give this matter your emmediate attention I am very
  truly your well wisher meaning Exactly wat I Say"

I saw all these letters, and received this one from the hand of this
Christian hero. He said to me:--"I went to bed a good many nights
thinking that quite possibly I should be dragged out of my bed, and
beaten or hanged before morning." Notwithstanding this, he wrote on
the outside of the envelope the following words, and passed them
around among those whom he knew to be conspirators against him:

  "In answer to the enclosed, I will say to my 'Democratic and
  inquiring friends,' that I expect to leave on or before Jan. 1st,
  1940, and that though I hoped to vote for 'St. John and
  Prohibition,' I have now decided to vote for 'Blaine and the
  Protection of all citizens in their political and civil rights.'"

When he gave me this letter, he took a promise that it should not be
published until after his death. He passed away in the triumph of his
sweet, but heroic faith a few months ago. He died where he had
suffered and dared for Christ's sake, in the midst of this ignorance
and sin.

Such stories as his ought to be told. It is cowardly timidity for
those of us who know them, to keep them from the Christian public.
Heroes and heroines answer to the roll-call of A.M.A. workers. I have
met them and mingled with them, the past three years, and I know the
sinew and fibre of their courageous faith. You, who send them out, and
who support them in the field, ought to know what they endure, and
hear, now and then, an incident of their heroism.

     *     *     *     *     *


Two cases of heroic self-denial have come under my notice recently. In
Macon there lives a colored woman whose husband is in an Insane
Asylum. Their home was recently burned to the ground. She has four
{164} small children with her, the eldest of whom is eleven years old,
who are dependent upon her for support. She earns just eight dollars
per month, and yet she sends one girl, aged fifteen, to Atlanta
University!

A young man, whose father was a white man and who is himself a blonde,
has been urgently invited by his white grandmother to come to her home
and take the position of her son's child. She is a wealthy woman,
owning a large plantation. The young man's father, her son, is dead.
The boy would have all the privileges of a wealthy young white man and
inherit the property on his grandmother's death. The sole condition
which the grandmother makes is that he shall give up all association
with his octoroon mother and refuse to recognize her in any way. Thank
God, the boy is too true to his gentle and loving mother to enter into
any such arrangement, even though the bribe offered is thousands of
dollars and a social position of great attractiveness. There is a
great deal of this quiet but heroic self-sacrifice among the colored
people in the South, that never finds its way into print.

     *     *     *     *     *


  THE ALABAMA ASSOCIATION.

PRESIDENT H.S. DEFOREST.

The thirteenth annual meeting of the Alabama Association was held at
Salma, March 30th to April 3d, when the floods were at their highest,
yet fourteen of our seventeen churches were represented. The
Sunday-school Association convened a day earlier, and one afternoon
the Woman's Missionary Association had a session by itself.

The opening sermon by Professor Andrews, was a powerful exposition of
Christian love, from the 13th of 1st Corinthians. One evening was
given to the higher, Christian education; one to three papers on "How
to Secure Homes," "The Home Indoors," and "Home Piety;" and the last
to three phases of the temperance question. Pastor C.B. Curtis, whose
church most generously entertained the Association, read a very
suggestive paper on "Self Support of the Churches," a pressing and
difficult question. Almost of necessity, when there is so much to be
done, and the resources are so small compared with the magnitude of
the undertakings, practical rather than theoretical questions come to
the front and engage earnest attention.

After a most satisfactory examination, six young men from the
Theological Department of Talladega College were licensed to preach,
and it is noteworthy, that, besides this latest gift of Talladega to
the ministry, eleven of the fourteen churches represented at this
meeting of the Association are ministered to by Talladega College or
its graduates. It is a wonder that some man wishing to put a
comparatively small sum of money where it would increase with a
compound interest of blessedness till the latter-day glories have
fully come, does not endow the chair of Theology at Talladega, and his
brothers take up the same line of usefulness till both {165} College
and Seminary are presided for. Some who were taking the rudiments of
learning here but a few years ago, and who have continued their
training at very email expense, are now acceptably filling difficult
and responsible positions in school, in business and in church. There
is more of this work to be done, and to be allowed to help seems a
privilege precious enough to make life vastly desirable.

     *     *     *     *     *


  TEMPERANCE WORK IN OUR SCHOOLS.

  Our esteemed neighbor at 58 Reade Street, Mr. J.N. Stearns,
  Publishing Agent of the National Temperance Society, recently made
  a visit to Florida. On his return trip, he visited several of the
  A.M.A. schools in the South, and his practiced eye of course
  detected the facts in regard to temperance instruction and
  influence. We quote the following items:

At Beach Institute, Savannah, under care of the American Missionary
Association, Miss A.A. Holmes principal, I found 230 pupils and a
strong temperance sentiment. The entire school receives sound
temperance instruction. Stirring temperance songs ring through the
halls. A Band of Hope holds regular meetings. "Mother Goose and Her
Temperance Family," was performed with great satisfaction by the
pupils, and a photograph group of the actors taken and preserved as a
memento of the occasion. "Alcohol and Hygiene" and the "Catechism on
Alcohol" are among the studies.

At Charleston I found Avery Institute slowly recovering from the
effects of the earthquake which effectually scattered its students.
Over 200, however, were now in attendance, under the auspices of the
American Missionary Association, with Professor M.A. Holmes principal.
Temperance is a cardinal virtue here, but they greatly need a
temperance library and other literature. All these schools have a
severe struggle to sustain their ordinary work, and must depend
largely upon outside help for temperance literature. They can use to
great advantage and carefully distribute, without expense, to the
community round about if only the material is furnished.

At Wilmington, N.C., a great work has been accomplished. It has 20,000
inhabitants, 12,000 of which are colored. In 1881, when the vote on
prohibition was taken in the State, it was all against the
proposition. A wonderful change for the better has taken place. I had
a most pleasant visit to Gregory Institute of 250 pupils, Mr. George
A. Woodard principal. This is also under the American Missionary
Association. "Alcohol and Hygiene" is taught in the higher branches
and temperance pervades every department. An open temperance society,
with Rev. George S. Rollins president, holds regular evening meetings,
with temperance songs, recitations, dialogues, essays and speeches,
for entertainment and instruction. The regular meeting occurred the
evening I was in town, and I greatly enjoyed the exercises. Carolina
Mills was proposed for {166} membership, and a committee of three
appointed to "investigate and report." The report was "favorable," and
read in regular order and adopted. The candidate came forward to take
the pledge, and proved to be a young man of genuine African descent.
The entire programme was rendered with great credit to all concerned.

     *     *     *     *     *


THE INDIANS.

  LETTER FROM AN INDIAN CHIEF IN DAKOTA.

  My Dear Sir:----Will you Please I have got your letter and I was
  vey glad--and vey Good letter--and I tell My Indian friends all
  good men and We are vey glad to see your good paper. And, Now, We
  Mandans Indian We are maken houses this River south sides and We
  are farmes And we have Great fields--and We like Vey much the White
  man Ways--and We are White mans--and We are a Friends to the White,
  and We hear much talk of you and we are good Indians Mandans. We do
  not do foolish to the Whites, and We are a good Friends to the
  Whites----And now I wants to know the Great Fathers Wishes to us.
  Please good tell me the Great fathers what he say to us--When you
  get this letter Please Write to me Yery soon. Good buy--

  I am Very your truly friends,

  MR. WOLFE, Chief.

  Fort Berthold West, 30 miles from here I live and have 16 acres and
  I am glad. I have a cow, 6 horses, a wagon, a plow. I have three
  houses and a store. I live south side this River. Yours,

  MR. WOLFE, Chief.

     *     *     *     *     *


THE CHINESE.

  EVANGELISTIC WORK.

It is now nearly five months since our evangelists went forth, and the
record of their work, if I had both grace and space to give it in
graphic detail, could not but interest the readers of the MISSIONARY.
Chin Toy was to labor in our more northern missions, viz., Stockton,
Sacramento, Marysville and Oroville, and Loo Quong was to go south to
Santa Barbara and San Diego and certain other cities where Chinese had
congregated, but in which there appeared to be none to care for their
souls. Subsequently another brother entered the field, Yong Jin,
laboring first at Santa Cruz, and now at Tucson, Arizona.

The intention was to give one month of service at each mission, and
one gratifying feature of our experience has been that at no point has
this {167} one month been deemed sufficient. In every case an urgent
plea has come for a longer visit and a larger work. In some cases, as
with Chin Toy in Sacramento, and Loo Quong at San Diego, it has been
necessary to yield to these appeals. The work needed could not be
fulfilled in the month assigned. But in general we have adhered to the
original plan, so as to cover the whole field.

The results have justified the undertaking. The work of these brethren
has been greatly blessed, first of all, to those who were already
believers in Jesus. They have been taught the truth more perfectly.
They have had their conceptions of a Christian's duty and a
Christian's privileges raised. They have been brought into closer
harmony with each other. It is too much to expect, perhaps, in view of
facts as they transpire in churches of American Christians--Christians
"to the manner born"--that our little groups of Chinese believers born
as "aliens from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers to the
covenants of promise," should be free from all envies and jealousies,
walking always in brotherly love. We wish it were so, but our wish is,
as yet, but partially fulfilled. Our evangelists have so presented
Christ, and so magnified the duty and the blessing of brotherly love,
and so exercised, also, their gifts of Christian diplomacy, as to
become peace-makers, and to restore a truly spiritual order at points
where chaos seemed impending.

They have been "in labors abundant." The following from Yong Jin, at
Santa Cruz, puts in fewest words their ordinary work: "This school has
nineteen or twenty scholars. About sixteen come to take the lesson
every evening. Mrs. Willett teach and I teach. [_i.e._ during the
usual school session from 7 till 9 p.m.] After the school is out, I
teach them the Bible lesson about half so long. [_i.e._ from 9.15 till
10.15 p.m.] Monday, Tuesday and Thursday evenings gave them the Bible
lesson of Chinese. Wednesday and Friday evenings, the Bible lesson of
English. Saturday evenings we have meeting. Sunday noon, I did preach
in the street--three times since I came here." With this is associated
constant visiting of such Chinese as either cannot or will not attend
the school, seeking to sow beside all waters. Also study; in some
cases aided through the kindness of some resident pastor, for these
brethren have entered upon this work untrained except in the work
itself, and one point of greatest moment in their present service is
to learn how to render better service in the years to come. Street
preaching is undertaken wherever possible. What a hearing can be
secured if only some American Christians will cooperate, was well
illustrated in the experience of Loo Quong at San Diego. I cite the
following sentences: "This afternoon we have a grand time in preaching
the good news of Jesus to the Chinese. There were more than _ten_ good
people who had gathered there to help me in the singing. After half an
hour of hard talk, [_i.e._, earnest laborious speaking,] then Mr.
Kirby, an old gentleman, next is Rev. Dr. Harwood, then a stranger.
{168}

All these speakings I have put in Chinese and they were listened to by
at least a thousand Chinese and whites. Among the helpers were Mrs.
Noble and Mrs. McKensie and the whole family of Rev. Dr. Harwood.
Besides these were many other good Christian ladies who stood around
me and were given willing lips to join the singing. I cannot tell you
all about our street preaching here. I will leave it for you to think
about and enjoy. Amen."

God has used this preaching of the Word, not only to edify the
brethren, but to bring men to repentance. The numbers may seem small
when compared with those reported by our American evangelists laboring
among the tens of thousands in our great cities, but, under the
circumstances, they are very cheering. At Stockton, 1; Sacramento, 1;
San Buenaventura, 3; San Diego, 3; Oakland, 4; San Francisco, 5;
Tucson, 5; Santa Barbara, 7; Santa Cruz, 11. Total 40. This is the
harvest of the past five months. If the work of the whole year should
yield corresponding returns, it will be the most fruitful of our whole
history. Much remains unsaid, for which I may find space hereafter.

WM. C. POND.

     *     *     *     *     *


The Chinese have been considered by many impervious to Christian
influence, but the following paragraph shows that by "deeds, not
words," the Oriental, sometimes, expresses his gratitude. Sometime ago
a Chinaman in a Sunday-school was taken ill, and, through the
influence of its superintendent, admission to a hospital was secured,
until he was able to return to his native land. But no word of thanks
was given for the faithful care and unwearied attentions he had
received, and only the assurance of the Master's approbation cheered
the hearts of those who had sowed the gospel truth in his name. The
weeks went by, when from over the sea came a living testimony of the
gratitude of this Chinamen in the form of his young son, whom he had
sent to America with the injunction to find the unforgotten
superintendent, and go to her Sunday-school. For five months now he
has been under her care, and at the recent reception given by the
Chinese scholars to their teachers, on their New Year, he wrote in a
clear, well-defined hand, every word correctly spelled, this letter to
his teacher, who had sent him her regrets that she could not be
present.

  My Dear Teacher:

  I thank you for your letter. I am sorry you could not come to the
  supper last Monday night. I am glad you can teach me every Sunday.
  I like to go to Sunday-school. Please write to me again.

  Yours truly----

Five months ago this boy was unable to speak or understand a word of
English; now he can read, write, and repeat the Lord's Prayer from
memory, a task he studied long and patiently to accomplish.

     *     *     *     *     *


{169}

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

     *     *     *     *     *


  WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

 CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

ME.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. C.A. Woodbary,
Woodfords, Me.

VT.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. Henry
Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

CONN.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171
Capitol Ave., Hartford, Conn.

N.Y.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C.C. Creegan,
Syracuse, N.Y.

ALA.--Woman's Missionary Association, Secretary, Mrs. G.W. Andrews,
Talladega, Ala.

OHIO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Flora K. Regal,
Oberlin, Ohio.

ILL.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151
Washington St., Chicago, Ill.

MICH.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Mary B. Warren,
Lansing, Mich.

WIS.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead,
Wis.

MINN.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs. H.L. Chase, 2,750
Second Ave., South, Minneapolis, Minn.

IOWA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Miss Ella E. Marsh,
Grinnell, Iowa.

KANSAS.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs. Addison
Blanchard, Topeka, Kan.

SOUTH DAKOTA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. S.E. Young,
Sioux Falls, Dak.

     *     *     *     *     *


The Woman's Missionary Association of Alabama held its annual meeting
in connection with the State Association, April 2d, at Selma. The
meeting was well attended, and encouraging reports were had from many
of the auxiliaries. The advantage of the local missionary societies to
the church and Sunday-school work was emphasized, and a desire for
more thorough local work was very apparent in the meeting. Many
subjects of interest were discussed. Among them the following:
Industrial Training in our Schools; Industrial Training in our Homes;
Should there be a Woman's Missionary Society in every church? If so,
the reason why every sister in the church should be a member; What
shall we do to make our Local Societies more active?

Greetings of the Second Woman's Temperance Union of Alabama, were
presented at this meeting. This Union is composed of colored women of
various views, together with Northern missionaries and teachers. There
is no doubt that their work for purity and sobriety is most efficient,
yet this Union can have no dealings with the other Union, though color
hinders neither of the vices which the Unions oppose.

     *     *     *     *     *


The Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan leads with "Lesson
Leaves" for its auxiliaries on the work of the different National
Societies. We give the programme for the A.M.A. for the benefit of any
who may wish to follow this example.

_Hymn._--"Work, for the night is coming."

_Bible Reading._--I Chronicles 29: 1-18.
{170}

_Special Subject for Prayer_.--That obstacles in the way of the speedy
coming of Christ be removed.

_First Topic_.--When, Where and How did this Society originate? (See
"History of American Missionary Association," also "A Catechism.")

_Second Topic_.--What are some of the results and a general summary of
the work done in forty-six years? (See same papers, and also "Pamphlet
No. 10--Forty Years of Missionary Work, Past and Present.")

_Third Topic_.--What are the four grand divisions of its work, and
where are its various fields of operations? (See same papers.)

_Fourth Topic_.--When was the Bureau of Woman's Work organized, and
what is its special department? (See "Forty Years of Missionary
Labor," page 17; also, Leaflet "Bureau of Woman's Work," "Freed Women
of the South," and "Sewing Needed.")

For pamphlets and leaflets mentioned above, apply to Miss D.E.
Emerson, 56 Reade St., New York.

     *     *     *     *     *


The ladies in the North who are engaged in every good work for the
Lord will be glad to find that there are those in the South who share
their burdens, and their faith, also. The letter below was written by
one of our most intelligent and earnest Christian workers--a colored
lady educated in one of our schools.

"Our usual lines of work have gone on with about the same results,
except among the women. Our Woman's Prayer Meeting shows unusual
fervor, and we are expecting to make this meeting _felt_ in the
community and church. Satan seems on the war-path, and we women feel
that we must be wide-awake and closer to the Lord, if the power of
evil is to be checked. In our last meeting the one feeling each
expressed was: 'What can _I_ do? I feel that I am called to work for
the Master, but _what_ can I do for Christ?' In the struggle for
bread, the time of many of the women is used all the day; then the
house must be cared for, and when this is done, strength fails. I
tried to impress the thought that much is gained when a soul is
anxious to work for the Lord, and that such a soul will not be left
unguided, which seemed to comfort many a tired mother.

"_My_ difficulty is different. I am perplexed to know which of the
many phases of Christian work to adopt for these women, and how to
keep up interest and attendance without multiplying meetings. I am
confident that our regular four weekly meetings and the regular
monthly meetings are all they can attend, yet they _need_ others. I am
often reminded of my dear mother's prayer which she used to cry out
when greatly tried in the days of slavery: 'Oh! for Job's patience and
Joshua's resolution, that we might all pull together like Pharaoh's
horses.' And I would add: 'Oh! for Solomon's wisdom and Samson's
strength, that we might understand and do the Lord's work.'"

     *     *     *     *     *


{171}

RECEIPTS FOR APRIL, 1888.

   MAINE, $224.38.

Acton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $5.00
Camden. Elm St. Cong. Ch. 22.70
Castine. Class 9, Trinitarian Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
U._ 1.26
Center Lebanon. "A Friend" 5.00
Bingham. Cong. Ch. 3.15
Blue Hill. "Pansy Band," _for Woman's Work_ 2.00
Brewer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. 16.50
Gorham. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Selma, Ala._ 10.00
Greenville. Cong. Ch. 23.00
Kennebunk. Rev. G.A. Lockwood, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 5.00
Lincoln. Cong. Ch. 2.00
Phillips. By Miss C.T. Crosby, _for Freight_ 0.68
Portland. Y.P.S.C.E. of Williston Ch., _for Wilmington, N.C._ 8.00
Portland. Ladies of Maine State Reform Sch., _for Woman's Work_ 6.00
Portland. Miss Marie Holt's S.S. Class, Box of Basted Work, etc., _for
Selma, Ala._
Portland. Mrs. Mary C. Ingalls 2.00
Scarboro. Rev. A. Smith 5.00
Searsport. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 6.09
Sidney. Mrs. A. Sawtelle, _for Woman's Work_ 1.00
Woodfords. By Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Bbl. of C., _for Selma, Ala._
--------
124.38

     LEGACY.

Bethel. Estate of Sarah J. Chapman, by A.W. Valentine, Ex.  100.00
                                                            ------
                                                           $224.38

   NEW HAMPSHIRE, $189.75.

Atkinson. Cong. Ch. and Soc., bal. to const. DANIEL W. REYNOLDS, L.M.
10.50
Berlin Falls. Parish Ch. of Christ                                     5.00
Concord. "A Friend"                                                    5.00
East Jaffrey. "Friends," Bbl. of C., _for Greenwood, S.C._
Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.                                                    9.75
Kingston. "A Friend"                                                   5.00
Littleton. Mr. and Mrs. D.C. Remick, 10; Benj. W. Kilburn, 5, _for
Atlanta U._ ..15.00
Littleton. Mrs. B.W. Kilburn                                           5.00
Nashua. First Ch.                                                     30.00
North Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     17.00
West Lebanon. Cong. Ch.                                               37.00
Penacook. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                                   5.00
South Newmarket. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                    5.00
Stratham. Cong. Ch.                                                   24.50
Sunapee. Sab. Sch., _for Lexington, Ky._                               7.00
Winchester. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                     4.00

   VERMONT. $385.88.

Berlin. First Cong. Ch. 16.00
Brookline. Mrs. S.G. Hastings 5.00
Burlington. Y.P.S.C.E., First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ 20.00
Burlington. Y.P. Soc. of C.E., Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._
Charlotte. "Ladies," by Mrs. Ellen D. Wild, _for McIntosh, Ga._ 15.00
Clarendon. Mrs. N.J. Smith 5.00
Dorset. Cong, Ch. (10 of which from Col. L.N. Sykes) 26.23
East Poultney. Cong. Ch. 3.50
Fayetteville. Cong. Ch. (1.75 of which _for McIntosh, Ga._) 6.52
Holland. Y.P. Soc., 2 Bdls. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._
Ludlow. Cong. Ch. 10.38
Lyndon Center. Alice L. Ray 5.00
Morgan. Lucy Little 0.50
Newbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. 55.25
Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $10.00
Peacham. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 46.74; Young People's Miss'y Soc., 3.26;
Rev. H.M. Andrews, in memory of Mrs. R.C. Andrews, 5; Bessie Varnum, 2
57.00
Pittsford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for McIntosh, Ga._ 25.00
Rupert. Class in Sab. Sch., M.E. Ch., Large Pkg. Cards; Class in Sab.
Sch., 5, _for Saint Augustine, Fla._ 5.00
Rutland. Y.L.M. League, _for Indian Sch'p_ 70.00
Tyson. Cong. Ch. 0.50
---- "A Friend," _for Indian M._ 50.00

   MASSACHUSETTS, $6,576.89.

Amherst. First Cong. Ch. 36.70
Amherst. First Cong. Ch. 25.00
Andover. Wm. Ashness 5.00
Andover. Mrs. Selah Merrill, Pkg. of Papers, _for Tougaloo U._
Andover. Ladies of Free Ch., 2 Bbls. of C. etc., _for Tougaloo U._
Arlington. Orthodox Cong. Ch. 35.00
Ashland. Henry Denham, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 1.00
Bedford. Sab. Sch. Class, 2 Pkgs Scrap-Books, _for St. Augustine,
Fla._
Bernardston. Cong. Ch. 4.51
Boston. Central Ch. 1,095.25
" Rev. Wm. H. Cobb 2.00
" Samuel D. Warren, 200; Wm. Emdicott, Jr., 200; Hon. Geo. G. Crocker,
100; Oliver Ditson & Co., 100; Henry E. Cobb, 100; Wm. O. Grover, 100;
"A Friend," 50; Frank J. Garrison, 25; Rev. Wm. E. Merriman, D.D., 25;
E.C. Carrigan, 25; Geo. Atkinson, 25; Stephen G. Deblois, 25; "A
Friend," 25; Rev. Henry W. Foote, 20; N.P. Hallowell, 10; Mrs. Sarah
L. Daniels, 5; Ellis L. Motte, 10; Mrs. Sarah Heroeschoff, 5; Samuel
E. Sewell, 5; Miss A.S. Woods, 1, _for Atlanta U._ 1,056.00
" Old South Ch., (of which _for Atlanta U._, 293; _for Fisk U._, 25;
_for Berea C._, 25) 976.06
" Mrs. E.J.W. Baker, _for Fisk U._ 50.00
" Union Ch. Sewing Circle, _for Tougaloo U._ 40.00
" Union Ch. Sewing Circle, Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo U._
" Mrs. P. Morse, Pkg. of Papers, _for Tougaloo U._
Dorchester. Second Ch. 99.42
" Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch. 13.61
" Miss Jemima R. Wilder, of Second Ch. 5.00
" Pilgrim Ch. and Soc. 35.00
" Mrs. H. Houston, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 10.00
" Harvard Ch. 10 00.
Roxbury. Highland Ch. 33.00
" Mrs. Arthur W. Tufts, Box of Books, etc., _for Sherwood, Tenn._
West Roxbury. South Evan. Ch. and Soc. 23.51
------ 3,458.85
Boxfod. First Cong. Ch. $35.00
Boxford. "Earnest Workers," 30; Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 10.15;
_for Mountain White Work_, by Mary L. Sawyer 40.15
Brimfield. Second Cong. Ch. 5.04
Brockton. Joseph Hewitt 5.00
Brookline. Mrs. E.H. Craft, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 110.00
Brookline. Harvard Ch. 71.75
Brookfield. Mrs. R.B. Moutegue, _for Freight_ 1.50
Dudley Falls. Ladles of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C. _for Atlanta U._ and
1.75 _for Freight_ 1.75
Cambridgeport. Sewing Circle Prospect St. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for
Tougaloo U._
Chelsea. Y.P.S. of C.E. First Cong. Ch., _for Fisk U._ 25.00
Chicopee. "Earnest Workers," Third Cong. Ch., _for Fisk U._ 25.00
Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch. 29.16
East Cambridge. Miss Mary P. Aikin, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 5.00
Enfield. Miss L.E. Fairbanks Sab. Sch. Class, _for Indian Schp_ 45.00
Fall River. Leonard N. Slade, 50; Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 5.32,
_for Indian M._; Sab. of First Cong. Ch., _for Indian Schp._, 17.50
72.82
Fall River. Y.P.S. of C.E., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ 50.00
Fitchburg. Rev. J.M.R. and Mrs. H.D. Eaton 10.00
Florence. Frank N. York's Sab. Sch. Class, 4.81: Miss Dean's Class, 3,
_for Tougaloo U._ 7.81
Foxboro. Mrs. A.E. Tracy, Pkg. of Papers _for Tougaloo U._
Framingham. Ladies of Plymouth Ch., 2 Bbls. of C., _for Fisk U._
Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 11.28
Goshen. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Tougaloo U._ 20.00
Hardwick. Calvinistic Ch. 6.50
Haverhill. Dr. John Cowell's Bible Class, Centre Ch., _for Fisk U._
30.00
Holliston. MRS. ELIZABETH S. BURNAP, to const. herself L.M. 30.00
Holyoke. Second Cong. Co., _for Indian Schp._ 18.00
Hoiyoko. Missionary Soc., _for Rosebud Indian M._ 0.50
Hyde Park. Soc. of Miss'y Workers, Pkg. of C.; Mrs. M.A. Wood, Pkg. of
Papers, _for Tougaloo U._
Lawrence. Trinity Cong. Ch. (11.42 _for Indian M._) 22.84
Lawrence. Mrs. J.H. Eaton, 10; Mrs. Jenners, 2; Fred. H. Eaton, 1;
_for Talladega C._ 13.00
Leominster Center. Mission Band, 20; Ladies of Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls. of
C., _for Atlanta U._ 20.00
Littleton. "Mite Box," _for Atlanta U._ 4.00
Lowell. L. Kimball 20.00
Mansfield. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., _for Wilmington, N.C._ 2.00
Maplewood. Infant Sab. Sch. Class, _for Wilmington, N.C._ 3.00
Marblehead. Hon. J.J.H. Gregory, _for Talladega C._, 130 and _for
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 25 155.00
Medfield. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ 21.10
Melrose. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ 25.00
Mills. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 14.58
Newton. Eliot Ch. 125.00
Newton. Sab. Sch. of Eliot Cong. Ch., _for Atlanta U._ 25.00
Newton Center. First Cong. Ch. 71.20
Northampton. Edwards Ch. Benev. Soc. 105.04
North Brookfield. Ladies' Benev. Soc. of Cong. Ch. _for Pleasant Hill,
Tenn._ 15.00
Norfolk. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 3.00
Oakham. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Santee Indian Sch._
5.00
Peru. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. $12.50
Reading. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 18.00
Rockland. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., Pkg. of Papers, _for Selma, Ala._
Shelburne Falls. Class No. 13, Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. 2.00
Somervilie. Franklin St. Ch. 135.35
South Amherst. Y.P.S. of C.E. _for Fisk U._ 30.00
Southboro. Ladies of Pilgrim Evan. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo_
South Weymouth, Union Cong. Ch., 90.29; Second Cong. Ch., 21 111.29
Spencer. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ 50.00
Springfield. Y.P.S.C.E. of Hope Cong. Ch. 12.50
Taunton. Broadway Sab. Sch., _for Fisk U._ 50.00
Tewksbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 18.83
Upton. _For Freight_ 3.00
Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 21.02
Ware. East Cong. Ch. (of which 78.36 _for Indian M._) to const. GEO.
W. CLARK, E.L. KNOX, WM. G. HAMILTON, A.E. DAVIS, E.H. BAKER, GEO. E.
TUCKER, GAMALIEL MARSH and NELSON DWIGHT L.M.'s 492.65
Ware. Miss P. Fuller, _for Indian M._ 1.00
Wellesley. Miss Harriet Hawes, _for Macon, Ga._ 5.00
West Dudley. "A Friend" 0.50
Westhampton. Cong. Ch. 26.50
West Medway. Second Cong. Ch. 7.20
West Stockbridge Village. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 29.14
Whitman. Y.P.S. of C.E., _for Fisk U._ 50.00
Worcester. Central Ch. 105.00
Worcester. Rev. Daniel Merriman, D.D., 100; Central Cong. Ch., 18.15,
_for Atlanta U._ 118.15
Worcester. Mrs. Wm. H. Drury, in memory of Mrs. Rebecca Putnam, 25;
Albert Curtis, 10; Geo. H. Estabrook, 5, _for Indian M._ 40.00
Worcester. Piedmont Ch., _for Berea, Ky._ 5.20
Worcester. Union Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Mobile, Ala._, 1, _for
Freight_ 1.00
Yarmouth. Sewing Circle of Cong. Ch., _for Freight_ 1.50
---- To const. MRS. HARREIT H. SMITH L.M. 30.00
---- "A Friend in Mass." 5.00
--------
$6,276.89

     LEGACY.

Beverly. Estate of John Pickett, by Geo. Roundy and Robert R.
Endicott, Adm'rs 300.00
--------
$6,576.89

     CLOTHING, ETC. RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

Philipps, Me. "Glad Helpers," 1 Bbl., _for Williamsburg, Ky._
South Berwick, Me. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 1 Bbl., _for Wilmington, N.C._
Boston, Mass. Miss H.H. Stanwood, 2 Boxes, _for Grand View, Tenn._
Newton, Mass. J.W. Davis, 1 Box
Pittsfield, Mass. Free Will Soc. of First Ch., Box, _for Atlanta U._
Watertown, Mass. Ladies of Phillips Ch., 1 Bbl., _for Pleasant Hill,
Tenn._

   RHODE ISLAND, $111.19.

Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                    61.19
Providence. North Cong. Ch., W.H.M. Soc., _for Dakota Home_ 50.00

   CONNECTICUT, $5,622.71.

Ansonia. Mrs. G. Cowles, _for Thomasville, Ga._ 5.00
Bethlehem. Cong. Ch. 15.00
Bloomfield. "Ladies," by Mrs. M.G. Bidwell, _for Thomasville, Ga._
14.25
Bridgeport. Olivet Cong. Ch. $9.55
Bristol. Orrin Cook 2.00
Buckland. J.D. Pickels, 25 lbs. Paper, _for Macon, Ga._
Darien. Cong. Ch. 5.00
East Haddam. "A Friend" 5.00
East Hampton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. 35.08
Enfield. Cong. Ch. 65.80
Enfield. Primary Dept., First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Macon, Ga._ 15.00
Essex. "The Whatsoevers," _for Thomasville, Ga._ 5.00
Farmington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ 83.64
Farmington. Mrs. Sarah E. Barney, _for Indian M._ 50.00
Franklin. Cong. Ch. 5.04
Guilford. "Wigwam Club," First Cong. Ch., for Indian Sch'p and to
const. MISS MARY F. MUNSON. L.M. 30.00
Granby. First Cong. Ch., 9; South Cong. Ch. 5.25 14.25
Hartford. Warburton Chapel Sab. Sch., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 23.15
Hartford. Windsor Ave. Cong. Ch. 20.00
Hartford. Mrs. Geo. Leon Walker, Bbl. of C., _for Talladega C._
Hebron. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._ 12.00
Manchester. Second Cong. Ch. 90.28
Meriden. Jessie R. Bridge, _for Indian M._ 3.00
Naugatuck. Miss Nettie Seymour's Sab. Sch. Class, _for Indian M._ 8.32
New Britain. D.M. Rogers, _for Tougaloo U._, and to const. M. HATTIE
ROGERS, L.M. 30.00
New Britain. Miss Belle Whaples, _for Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._
3.00
New Haven. First Ch., 158.86; Church of the Redeemer, 82.00 240.86
New Haven. Young Ladies' Mission Circle of United Ch., _for Indian
Sch'p, Santee Home, Neb._ 50.00
New Haven. Sab. Sch., Ch. of the Redeemer, _for Indian M._ 20.00
New London. First Cong. Ch. 62.78
New London, "A Friend," _for Atlanta U._ 50.00
New London. J.N. Harris, 10; C.D. Ross, 10; Mrs. P. Eakins, 5, _for
Jewett Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._ 25.00
New London. First Ch., _for Indian M._ 15.00
New Preston. Cong. Ch. (5 of which from "A Friend," _for Conn. Ind'l
Sch., Ga._) 58.50
North Haven. Cong. Ch. (25 of which _for Atlanta U._) 80.00
Norwich. Park Cong. Ch. 2,286.29
Norwich. Broadway Cong. Ch. 200.00
Norwich. W.A. Slater, 50; L.R. Jewett, 25; H.B. Norton, 20; Wm. P.
Greene, 20; Park Ch., 20; "Cash," 10; E.A. Huntington, 10; L.G. Lane,
10; Amos W. Prentice, 10; Edward H. Gibbs, 10; L.W. Carroll, 10; Mrs.
Mary B. Coit, 10; Mrs. J.M. Huntington, 10; Mrs. O.P. Avery, 10;
"Cash," 10; John Mitchell, 10; C.B. Baldwin, 10; T.J. Leavens, 5;
Charlotte L. Carroll, 5; J.D.T. Blackstone, 5; Geo. D. Colt, 5, _for
Jewett Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._ 275.00
Norwich Town. "Other Girls," by F.G. Williams, _for Thomasville, Ga._
25.00
Plantsville. Cong. Ch. 171.35
Poquonock. Cong. Ch. 37.93
Poquonock. Dea. Thomas Duncan, 10,000 Library Cards; "Willing
Workers," Cong. Ch., Box of C., _for Macon, Ga._
Putnam. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., 25, and Mission Workers, 25, _for
Atlanta U._ 50.00
Salisbury, Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ 12.50
Salisbury. Sab. Sch. Class, by Mrs. Henry Hubbard 5.00
South Coventry. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. 24.66
South Norwalk. Cong. Ch. 68.93
Southport. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Box of Bedding, _for Fisk U._
South Windsor. First Cong. Ch. 8.38
Stafford Springs. Cong. Ch. $12.00
Stratford. Mrs. Mary E. Curtiss 5.00
Waterbury. Woman's Benev. Soc. of Second Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_
70.00
Waterbury. John C. Burrell, _for Indian M._ 5.00
Westford. Cong. Ch. 4.25
West Suffield. Cong. Ch. 11.31
West Winsted. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ 12.01
West Stafford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 4.50
Winchester. "Ten Times One Club," by Miss S. Jennie Marsh, _for Santee
Indian M._ 15.00
Windham. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Williamsbury, Ky._
18.00
Woodbury. Miss Emily Wheelock, _for Thomasville, Ga._ 5.00
---- "Friends in Conn." _for Indian Sch'p_ 70.00
---- "Friend," _for Talladega C._ 25.00
Woman's Home Missionary Union of Conn., by Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, Sec.:
Ellington. Ladles' Miss. Soc., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._ 20.00
Hartford. Parsonage Circle First Cong. Ch., _for Austin, Tex._ 40.00
West Winfield. Ladies' M. Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
Ga._ 50.00
------ 110.00
--------
$4,722.71

     LEGACIES.

New London. Trust Estate of Henry P. Haven, _for Jewett Mem. Hall,
Grand View, Tenn._ 50.00
Rocky Hill. Estate of Rev. A.B. Smith, by Rev. Elijah Harmon, Ex.
850.00

   NEW YORK, $5,469.27.

Albany. "A Friend," adl. 10.00
Amsterdam. S. Louise Bell. 5.00
Brooklyn. Ch. of the Pilgrims (of which: Mrs. S.B. Hutchison, 75; C.L.
and K. Smith, 25; and Mrs. Perry's Sab. Sch. Class, 6.25; _for Indian
M._) 799.78
Brooklyn. German Evan. Sab. Sch., Schermerhorn St., _for Indian M._
75.00
Brooklyn. Pilgrim Ch. Mission, _for Indian Schp_ 40.00
Brooklyn. Oliver A. Gager, 10; William V. Tupper, 5; _for Atlanta U._
15.00
Brooklyn. J.E. Jewett, _for Jewett Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._ 25.00
Brooklyn. ----, 10; Miss M.A. Hall's Sab. Sch. Class, _for Tuition_ 1,
and _for Poor_, 5; Mrs. Hall, 1, _for Williamsburg, Ky._ 17.00
Brooklyn. Rev. E.P. Thwing. D.D., 1,000 Pamphlets; Mrs. S.A.M. Kent,
Pkg Papers
Buffalo. First Cong. Ch. 100.00
Chittenango. Mrs. Amelia L. Brown 7.00
Ellington. Mrs. H.B. Rice, 6; "A Friend," 4 10.00
Hamilton. Cong. Ch. 16.00
Ithaca. First Cong. Ch. 56.57
Jamestown. Rev. W.D. Henry 5.00
Livonia. Mrs. William Calvert 10.00
Maine Village. Cong. Ch. 12.00
Newburg. Selah R. Van Duzen, _for Thomasville, Ga._ 10.00
New York. Broadway Tabernacle (25 of which from Mrs. H.B. Spelman,
_for Student Aid, Atlanta U._ and 25 from Mrs. Chas. L. Mead, _for
Mountain White Work_) 2,003.33
New York. Cornelius N. Bliss, 500; Mr. and Mrs. Henry Villard, 200;
_for Atlanta U._ 700.00
New York. Bethany Sewing Sch., _for Indian Schp_ 27.00
New York. Mrs. Melissa P. Dodge, _for Jewett Memorial Hall, Grand
View, Tenn._ 20.00
New York. Wm. R. Gillette and J.W. Gillette (Hudson), _for Fisk U._
$15.00
New York. C.L. Mead, _for Talladega C._ 10.00
New York. Mrs. Lucy Thurber 5.00
New York. National Temp. Soc., Box of Books; E.B. Treat, Pkg. of
Books; _for Sherwood, Tenn._
Norwood. Cong. Ch., Box of Books, _for Athens, Ala._
Poughkeepsie. Sab. Son. of First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._
Rutland. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. 15.00
Sherburne. First Cong. Ch. 40.55
Suspension Bridge. First Cong, Ch. 13.74
Syracuse. Mrs. Clara C. Clarke, 7.80; Miss F. Amelia Clarke, 5 12.80
Tarrytown. "A Friend" 80.00
Thiells. J.H. Cassedy, 500, _for enlargement and equipment of Slater
Shop, Talladega C._ and 25 _for Atlanta U._ 525.00
Union Falls. Francis E. Duncan 10.00
West Coxsackie. Mrs. E.F. Spoor, 2.50; Miss A.G. Fairchild, 2.50 5.00
West Bloomfield. Mrs. S.B. Sherrill, Pkg. Patchwork; 1.50 _for
Freight_, _for Sherwood, Tenn._ 1.50
---- "A Friend in Central N.Y." _for Talladega C._ 10.00
Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y., by Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treas., _for
Woman's Work_:
Albany 30.00
Brier Hill 12.00
Brooklyn. Plymouth Ch. W.C. Ass'n 30.00
Buffalo. Ladies' Soc. 30.00
Churchville. Aux. 10.00
Harford. Ladies' Aux. 10.00
Homer. Ladies 5.00
Jamestown. L.M.S., to const. MRS. HENRY FRANK L.M. 30.00
Java. Ladies 5.00
Oswego. Ladies' H.M. Soc. 15.00
Poughkeepsie. Ladies' H.M. Soc. 25.00
Syracuse. Primary Pept. of Plymouth Sab. Sch. 20.00
West Groton. Y.P.M. Soc. 10.00
------ 242.00
--------
$4,969.27

     LEGACY.

Syracuse. Estate of Mrs. Silence J. White, by W.C. Goudy, Ex. (60 of
which to const. MRS. LOUISE M. GARDINER and MRS. LUCIA E. PHILLIPS
L.M.'s) 500.00
--------
$5,469.27

   NEW JERSEY, $659.98.

Arlington. Bbl. of C., _for Savannah, Ga._
Bound Brook. Cong Ch. 33.32
Jersey City. Mrs. C. Chichester 1.00
Montclair. First Cong. Ch., 365.66; Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
100.00 465.66
Montclair. First Cong. Ch., Easter Coll., _for Atlanta U._ 140.00
Montclair. Ladies Miss'y Soc. of First Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for
Washington, D.C._
Plainneld. Mrs. Mary E. Whiton, _for Woman's Work_ 20.00

   PENNSYLVANIA, $468.07.

Center Road. J.A. Scovel                                    2.00
Dunsfort. Mrs. Mary M. Mehaffey                             2.00
Ebensburg. First Cong. Ch.                                  7.40
Morris Run. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch.                           426.67
Philadelphia. Frederick S. Kimball, _for Talladega, Ala._  25.00

   OHIO, $576.60.

Cincinnati. Ladies of Central Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Fisk U._
Cleveland. Macedonian Circle, _for Indian Sch'p_ $15.00
Cleveland. Y.P.M. Soc. of Jennings Av. Cong. Ch., _for Mountain white
Work_ 9.17
Conneaut. Sab. Sen. of Cong. Ch. 10.00
Greensburg. Mrs. H.B. Harrington 5.00
Hudson. First Cong. Ch. 10.00
Kent. Cong. Ch., 16.83; S.S. Class, 2.50 19.35
Mansfield. First Cong. Ch. 192.55
Marietta. First Cong. Ch. 67.10
Medina. Mrs. Thompson's S.S. Class, 5; Opportunity Club, of Cong. Sab.
Sch., by Kate J. Stow, Sec., 2.10 7.10
North Ridgeville. S.S. Class, Cong. Ch., _for Williamsburg, Ky._ 0.88
North Springfield. Mrs. Walker, Pkg. of C., _for Athens, Ala._
Oberlin. First Ch. 68.93
Oberlin. By W.E. Wheeler, _for Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._ 2.00
Paddy's Run. Cong. Ch. 25.50
Ravenna. Cong. Ch. 22.00
Strongsville. First Cong. Ch. 10.00
Tallmadge. Young Ladies' Home M. Soc., by W. Alling, _for Woman's
Work_ 20.00
Toledo. Y.P.M. Soc., _for Austin, Tex._ 12.00
Wakeman. Cong. Ch. 6.03
West Andover. Cong. Ch. 16.72
Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. Phebe A. Crafts, Treas.,
_for Woman's Work_:
Akron. L.M.S. 10.00
Austinburg. Miss V.A. Haight 3.20
Conneaut. Cong. Ch. W.H.M. 8.00
Madison. First Cong. Ch., W.B.S. 26.07
Medina. Cong. Ch., W.M.S. 10.00
------ 57.27

   INDIANA, $15.00.

Bloomington. Mrs. A.B. Woodford, _for Fisk U._ 15.00

   ILLINOIS, $660.44.

Amboy. _For Mobile Ala._ 1.00
Aurora. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Fisk U._ 25.00
Bone Gap. Mrs. Lu Rice 10.00
Chicago. South Cong. Ch., 25; Soc. of Inquiry, Theo. Sem., 10.40 35.40
Crystal Lake. Cong. Ch. 7.00
Earlville. "J.A.D." 50.00
Farmington. Cong. Ch. ..60.75
Galesburg. Mrs. M.A. Hitchcock, 2; Miss Colton, 1; Mrs. S.B. Holmes,
1, _for Fisk U._ 4.00
Galva. Sab. Sen. of First Cong. Ch., _for Sherwood, Tenn._ 38.25
Geneseo. Mrs. Nourse, 20; Mrs. Huntington, 5, _for Fisk U._ 25.00
Hinsdale. Mrs. S.L. Kennedy, _for Fisk U._ 10.00
Hinsdale. Mrs. J.C. Ripley, Pkg. of Papers, _for Athens, Ala._
Lawn Ridge. Mrs. Kiterage, 1; Miss Lock, 50cts 1.50
Lowell. "A Friend" 10.00
Millington. Mrs. D.W. Jackson 0.50
Morris. Cong. Ch. 15.25
Newark. Mrs. F. Haverhill 0.50
Oak Park. Sab. Sch. of First Ch., 28.86; Mrs. Huggins, 3, _for Fisk
U._ 31.86
Paxton. Cong. Ch. 40.00
Payson. _For Mobile, Ala._ 4.00
Peoria. First Cong. Ch. 100.00
Peoria. Mrs. Griswold, _for Fisk U._ 25.00
Plymouth. Miss A.A. Burton 5.00
Poplar Grove. Cong. Ch. 4.77
Princeton. Mrs. P.B. Corss, 10; Cong. Ch., 1.50, _for Fisk U._ 11.50
Princeton. First Cong. Ch. $15.00
Providence. Cong. Ch. 7.03
Rio. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. 4.20
Rockford. Mrs. John L. Page, _for Atlanta U._ 25.00
Rockford. Mrs. W. Talcott, 10; Mrs. J.L. Page, 3; T.L. Robertson, 10,
_for Fisk U_ 23.00
Seward. Woman's Miss'y Soc., by Alice Day, _for Woman's Work_ 5.00
Shirland. Cong. Ch. 6.25
Winnebago. Cong. Ch. 7.00
Woman's Home Missionary Union of Ill., _for Woman's Work_:
Englewood. L.H.M.S. of First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ 21.68
Englewood. King's Children, First Ch., _for Kindergarten, Tougaloo U._
3.50
Englewood. King's Children, Juniors, _for Tougaloo U._ 6.50
-------- 31.68

   MICHIGAN, $155.91.

Allegan. First Cong. Ch., 5.16; Y.P.S. of C.E., 1; _for Fisk U._  6.16
Calumet. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ 40.00
Canandaigua. Cong. Ch.                                            3.10
Cold Water. "A Friend"                                            5.00
Covert. A.S. Packard, _for Fisk U._                              25.00
Detroit. Mrs. G.N. Fletcher, Bbl. of Goods, _for Talladega C._
Grand Rapids. South Cong. Ch.                                     7.00
Grass Lake. Cong. Ch.                                            10.65
Hancock. W.M. Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._              25.00
Kallamazoo. Mrs. J.A. Kent                                       10.00
Morenei. Cong. Ch.                                                4.00
St. Ignace. Cong. Ch.                                             5.00
Saint Joseph. J.H. Lee, _for Fisk U._                            10.00
---- "A Friend"                                                   5.00

   WISCONSIN, $135.81.

Clintonville. Cong. Ch.                                             4.75
Durand. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                           9.22
Eau Claire. "Cheerful Givers," by Bertha Duganne, Treas.           17.50
Emerald Grove. Cong. Ch.                                            2.37
Lake Geneva. Cong. Ch.                                             12.25
Madison. First Cong. Ch.                                           66.49
Madison. Mrs. Amelia E. Doyon, Pkg. of Books, _for Sherwood, Tenn._
Mazomanie. Cong. Ch.                                                1.50
Menomonee. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                             7.72
New London. Cong. Ch.                                               4.25
Oak Creek. Cong. Ch.                                                4.85
Racine. Welsh Coog. Ch.                                             3.05
Salem. Cong. Ch.                                                    1.86

   IOWA, $259.84.

Anamosa. Mrs. Mary G. Flake, _for student Aid, Straight U._     5.00
Clay. Cong. Ch.                                                17.02
Clear Lake. C.E. Soc., by M.J. Thompson, _for Beach Inst._      1.50
Creaco. Cong. Ch.                                               6.61
Des Moines. Miss'y Concert, _for Fisk U._                       4.64
Durant. Mrs. T. Dutton (5 of which _for Oahe Indian M._)       15.00
Grinnell. Sam'l P. Cooper, 100; Mrs. Magoun, 1; _for Fisk U._ 101.00
Grinnell. Cong. Ch.                                            13.94
Hull. Cong. Ch.                                                10.00
Lyons. Cong. Ch.                                               12.05
Maquoketa. Cong. Ch.                                           50.55
Quasqueton. Cong. Ch.                                           8.53

   MINNESOTA, $72.45.

Minneapolis. First Cong. Ch., 25.06; Plymouth Ch., 22.10; R. Laughlin,
1.50 48.66
Saint Paul. Lyman D. Hodge, 10; Class of Boys, 1.50; _for Student Aid,
Talladega C._ $11.50
Winona. First Cong. Ch. 12.29
Winona. Box of Material, _for Sewing Room, Marion, Ala._

   MISSOURI, $33.60.

Garden City. W.B. Wills, 10; Miss. A.C. Wills, 2; F.P. Morclan, 1;
P.M. Wills, 1 14.00
La Grange. German Cong. Ch. 1.00
Peirce City. Cong. Ch. 18.60

   KANSAS, $34.62.

Larned. "Our Missionary Box," by Mrs. S.C. Boardman, 5.65; Miss F.A.
Locke, 5 10.65
Paola. Cong. Ch. 22.17
Plevna. Cong. Ch. 1.80

   DAKOTA, $110.00.

  Gladstone. "A Friend"                                              100.00
  Ponca Agency. Ponca Mission, _for Indian M._                         5.00
  Dakota Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. Sue Fifield, Treas.:
  Sioux Falls. W.M.S.                                                  5.00
                                                                ------ 5.00

   NEBRASKA, $114.95.

Ashland. Cong. Ch. 12.58
Columbus. Cong. Ch. 4.04
Exeter. First Cong. Ch. 8.00
Greenwood. Cong. Ch. 4.25
Hastings. First Cong. Ch. 7.08
Santee Agency. Miss H.A. Brown, 30; Miss S.L. Voorhees, 25; _for
Indian M._ 55.00

   CALIFORNIA, $1,376.37.

Belmont. Mrs. E.L. Reed and daughters, Miss H. Reed and Mrs. F.A.
Blackbrun, 20; Willie Reed, 35c. 20.35
Grass Valley. Edward Coleman, 100; Cong. Ch., 27.27 127.27
National City. Cong. Ch. 38.50
San Francisco. The California Chinese Mission 1192.25

   WASHINGTON TERRITORY, $7.00

Medical Lake. First Cong. Ch. 7.00

   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $188.66.

Washington. First Cong. Ch., 175; Lincoln Memorial Ch., 8.66         183.66
Washington. Mrs. J.H. Jennings, _for Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._
5.00

   MARYLAND, $3.00.

Baltimore. "A Friend," _for Student Aid, Savannah, Ga._ 3.00

   KENTUCKY, $677.43.

Lexington. Tuition       215.28
Williamsburg. Tuition    459.90
Williamsburg. "A Friend"   2.25

   TENNESSEE, $1,307.72.

Jellico. Tuition                                80.00
Jonesboro. Public Sch. Fund, 21; Rent, 1.50     22.50
Jonesboro. Tuition                              10.10
Memphis. Tuition                               436.75
Nashville. Tuition, 536.12; Rents, 6.50        436.75
Nashville. Rev. H.S. Bennett, _for Fisk U._     30.20
Pleasant Hill. "A Friend," _for Boarding Hall_  50.00
Sherwood. "Friends," _for Student Aid_         135.55

   NORTH CAROLINA, $226.98.

Pekin. Cong. Ch.                                   $1.00
Strieby. Cong. Ch., Christmas Gift                  1.00
Troy. S.D. Leak                                     1.00
Wilmington. Tuition                               156.50
Wilmington, Cong. Ch., 58.48; Miss H.L. Fitts, 10  68.48

   SOUTH CAROLINA, $220.00.

Charleston. Tuition              214.00
Charleston. By Rev. Geo. C. Rowe   6.00

   GEORGIA, $534.85.

Macon. Tuition                                              217.55
McIntosh. Tuition                                            33.00
Savannah. Tuition                                           205.25
Thomasville. Tuition                                         71.55
Thomasville. Sab. Sch. of Conn. Ind'l Sch., _for Indian M._   7.50

   ALABAMA, $612.85.

Athens. Tuition                                             63.45
Marion. "C.W.L." _for Marion Ala._                          12.50
Mobile. Tuition                                            221.15
Selma. Miss Julia Andrews, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._   8.00
Talladega. Tuition                                         307.75

   FLORIDA, $10.00.

Sanford. Mrs. Moses Lyman 10.00

   LOUISIANA, $331.00.

New Orleans. Tuition 331.00

   MISSISSIPPI, $121.60.

Tougaloo. Tuition, 117.50; Rent, 2        119.50
Tougaloo. "Helping Hand," _for Indian M._   2.00

   TEXAS, $249.40.

Austin. W.A.H. Evans, 100; Miss M.J. Adams, 25; _for Austin, Texas_
125.00
Austin. Tuition                                                     124.40

     CONG'L CHURCHES IN THE SOUTH, TOWARD EXPENSES OF REV. JAMES WHARTON,
     EVANGELIST.

Louisville, Ky.          2.60
Nashville, Tenn.        12.00
Birmingham, Ala.        12.00
Jenifer, Ala.            5.60
Marion, Ala.             7.75
Selma, Ala.             18.00
Talladega, Ala.         25.00
                 ------ 82.95

   MEW MEXICO, $8.00.

Santa Fe. Ramona Sch., Sarah E. Moore.         8.00
                                       ---- $75.00.
---- _For Indian M., Hope Station_            75.00

   CANADA, $5.00

Montreal. Chas. Alexander 5.00

   EAST AFRICA, $30.00.

Inhambane. Rev. B.F. Ousley, _for Fisk U._      30.00
                                            =========
Donations                                  $22,313.80
Legacies                                     1,800.00
Tuition                                      3,821.25
Rents                                           10.00
                                             --------
Total for April                            $27,945.05
Total from Oct. 1 to April 30              158,921.20
                                            =========

   FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for April    $65.90
Previously acknowledged    647.18
                         --------
Total                     $713.18
                        =========

   RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION,

from Oct. 1st, 1S87, to March 16th, 1838. E. Palache, Treas.:

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS.--Alameda, Chinese Mon. Off's, 2; Cong. Ch., O.M.
Goddard, 10.--Anniversary Coll., 25, to const. REV. W.W. SCUDDER, JR.,
L.M.--Marysville, Chinese Mon. Off's, 33.05.--Oakland, Japanese Mon.
Off's, 4.20.--Oroville, Chinese Mon. Off's, 7.15.--"Friend"
6.--Sacramento, Chinese Mon. Off's, 31.75--San Diego, Chinese Mon.
Off's, 6.25; Ah Quinn, 2.--Santa Barbara, Chinese Mon. Off's, 64.25;
Chinese, _Special for books_, 11.50; Anniversary Coll., 4.50; Annual
Memberships, American, (2 of which from Mrs. J. Bates), 10.--Santa
Cruz, Chinese Mon. Off's. 29.40; Chinese _Special, for refitting and
furnishing Mission house_, 60.85.--Stockton, Chinese Mon. Off's,
27.90.--Tucson, Chinese Mon. Off's, 15.70 $354.25
FROM CHURCHES.--Oakland, First Cong. Ch., 150.--San Francisco, Bethany
Ch. (Americans), E.P. 2.50; From Chinese Central Mission, Monthlies,
23.15; Barnes Mission, Monthlies, 7.95; West Mission, Monthlies,
17.90; Ng. Hing, 4 205.50
FROM INDIVIDUAL OFFERINGS.--Mrs. Jane Sanford, 12; Edson D. Hale, 2
14.00
FROM EASTERN FRIENDS.--Bucksport, Me., Miss Julia Barnard,
5.--Marlboro, Mass., Miss H.F. Alexander, 1.--Albany, N.Y., Mission
Sab. Sch., by J.C. Hughson, 14.--Spring Valley, N.Y., Miss M.C.
Waterbury, 30 50.00
ALSO RECEIVED FOR ENLARGEMENT AND FURNISHING OF MISSION HOUSE SAN
DIEGO.--San Diego, W. Collier, 50; Mrs. L.C. Gunn, 25; Mrs. W.W.
Steward, 25; Daniel Stone, 25; Bryant Howard, 25; O.S. Hubbell, 20;
Mrs. Babcock, 20; San Diego Lumber Co., 15; Mrs. J.P. Noble, 15; G.W.
Marston, 10: Mrs. J.H. Ferry, 10; Mrs. C.T. Hamilton, 5; Mrs. A.H.
Panly, 5; Emma R. Sheldon, 5; Geo. M. Hitchcock, G; Mrs. A.A. Thomas,
5; Mrs. A.E. Gilbert, 5; Mrs. H.L. Story, 5; M.L. Brown, 5; Mrs.
Bennett, 5. Mrs. E.W. Morse, 5. Mrs. M.M. Kew, 5; M.T. Gilmore, 5;
J.H. Smith, 5; Mrs. Dr. Powers, 6; Mrs. J.C. Packard, 5; Mrs. J.H.
Harwood, 5: Friends through Mrs. M.A. McKenzie, 79; Other friends, in
sums of 2 or less, 19.60; Anniversary Coll., 21.40 440.00
Pittsburg, Pa., Hazelton Miss. Soc 7.00
Detroit, Mich.," Bright Shining Stars," by Mrs. Black 5.00
FROM CHINESE.--An Quinn, 20; Quon Seney, 17; Him Que, 5; Quon Man, 5;
Quon Sue, 5; Jay Young, 5; Ah Soon, 5. Lee Fook, 5; Ah Sing, 5;
Charley Min, 5; Quon Soon, B; Hom Wee, 5; Charley Sing, 2.50; Other
offerings of 2 or less, 27 116.50
--------
$1,192.25

     *     *     *     *     *


H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,

56 Reade St., N.Y.

     *     *     *     *     *


  Footnote 1:

  Deceased.






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 42, NO. 06, JUNE, 1888 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

