Produced from page scans provided by Cornell University.





{85}

The American Missionary

     *     *     *     *     *

Vol. XLII. April, 1888. No. 4.

     *     *     *     *     *

CONTENTS

   EDITORIAL.
        FINANCIAL--PARAGRAPH
        MOUNTAIN WORK--ATLANTA UNIVERSITY
        INDIAN ORDER--FROM GEO. W. CABLE
        DEATH OF HON. A.S. BARNES
        PARAGRAPHS
        SPECIMENS OF SCHOOL ENDEAVOR
        A SERIOUS ALARM IN GEORGIA
        EDUCATIONAL WORK IN THE SOUTH
   THE SOUTH.
        LETTER FROM AN EVANGELIST
   THE CHINESE.
        RESULTS THAT ELUDE THE STATISTICIAN
   BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.
        THE BLACK WOMAN OF THE SOUTH
   YOUNG FOLKS.
        WHAT SUSIE FOUND AT TOUGALOO
        LETTER FROM AN INDIAN PUPIL
   RECEIPTS

     *     *     *     *     *

New York.
Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance. Published by the American
Missionary Association.
Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.
Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

     *     *     *     *     *

{86}

American Missionary Association.

     *     *     *     *     *

PRESIDENT,

------ ------

Vice-Presidents.

Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.

Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.

Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.

Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.

Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.

Corresponding Secretaries.

Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

Treasurer.

H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

Auditors.

PETER MCCARTEE.

CHAS. P. PEIRCE.

Executive Committee.

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.

ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.

For Three Years.

LYMAN ABBOTT,

A.S. BARNES,[1]

J.R. DANFORTH,

CLINTON B. FISK,

ADDISON P. FOSTER,

For Two Years.

S.B. HALLIDAY,

SAMUEL HOLMES,

SAMUEL S. MARPLES,

CHARLES L. MEAD,

ELBERT B. MONROE,

For One Year.

J.E. RANKIN,

WM. H. WARD,

J.W. COOPER,

JOHN H. WASHBURN,

EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

District Secretaries.

Rev. C.J. RYDER, 21 Cong'l House, Boston.

Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D., 151 Washington Street, Chicago.

Financial Secretary for Indian Missions.

Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON,

Bureau of Woman's Work.

Secretary, Miss D.E. EMERSON, 56 Reade Street, N.Y.

     *     *     *     *     *

  COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to
the Editor, at the New York Office.

  DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A
payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

  FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

     *     *     *     *     *

{87}

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

     *     *     *     *     *

Vol. XLII. April, 1888. No. 4.

     *     *     *     *     *

 American Missionary Association.

     *     *     *     *     *

We acknowledge with gratitude to God and to his people the fact that
our receipts during the month of February are such as greatly to
encourage us.

We are cheered, not only by the benevolences which are reporting
themselves from the churches, but also by the kind words of sympathy
and helpfulness which show us anew that this great and exigent work
upon us was never nearer than now to the hearts of our pastors and
churches.

We may add that the month just past and those immediately before us
are those upon which we must largely depend for our fiscal year. We
are coming to the summer season, when contributions are less likely to
be taken. We trust that those who believe that God has called the
American Missionary Association to this immense work in the name of
Christ, will not cease to pray that the hearts of men may be moved to
heed the appeals of those who, through us, ask for the very bread of
life, and who will not have it unless we carry it to them.

We are now compelled to deny more appeals for help which ought to be
heard than we are granting. Several schools which were begun by
private enterprise with good intent, are now asking us to take them
from their hands upon our own, where they can be perpetuated and
saved. We would like to save these schools to the needy people whose
hope is in them, and to protect the churches from indiscriminate
appeals for works which they have not authorized, and which we could
do with greater economy and better care; but for this we need a
generous increase of gifts. Our faith was in Him who said, "Knock, and
it shall be opened unto you," and the doors were opened. God withdrew
the bolts of hindrance and said, "Beloved, I have set before you an
open door." Our faith is in Him who also said "Ask, and ye shall
receive."

     *     *     *     *     *

A friend has just sent us eighteen subscriptions to the _American
Missionary_. This might be repeated easily by a thousand friends. There
is {88} scarcely a self-sustaining church in the United States where
it could not be done by one who would try to do it as an act of
missionary love. Some who read this, perhaps, will try and will
succeed.

     *     *     *     *     *

The name of Rev. Frank Cross, who was appointed to the charge of the
Rosebud Indian Mission, was by mistake not printed in the roll of
workers. He is there, however, and his work has gone on bravely and
hopefully.

     *     *     *     *     *

We wish that the extent, and necessity, and hopefulness of our
mountain work, were more fully understood by our readers. Now is our
opportunity and the accepted time to answer the most urgent appeals
from this neglected region in the heart of our country. Our
Congregational churches are just what are needed to uplift these
people. One of our earnest missionaries writes us:--

  "The A.M.A. has done a work here to be profoundly grateful for as a
  beginning, but thus far it is only playing around the edge of its
  mountain work. This mountain region is of great extent. Sober
  calculation from facts already gleaned, makes a thousand
  Congregational churches in these mountains the possibility of the
  future, if only the strategic points can now be occupied. One
  church and one school to a county, should be our immediate aim;
  then we can throw upon these the work of developing native teachers
  and preachers for the rest. There are forty counties waiting for
  us, and all our mountain work so far is in three or four. I see
  this place where I am, changing like magic under the influence of
  school and church, but the necessity for our going forward
  oppresses me. I am ready for any additional labor, and will carry
  any burden my strength will permit, if only the American Missionary
  Association will take for its motto, 'One church and one school in
  every mountain county, as fast as they can be established.' I feel,
  when I see the need, as if I could plead the money right out of the
  most self-indulgent members of our favored churches at home. It
  would not be expensive as compared with other missionary work.
  Cannot some way be devised for making a large advance on the
  present movement?"

     *     *     *     *     *

Those who thought to cripple Atlanta University because it could not
yield its principles for the sake of a State appropriation of $8,000
made a mistake. They have helped that which they meant to hinder. The
university will get the money. Joseph's brethren took counsel together
and said, "We will see what will become of his dream," and they
thought they had a sure thing when they put him in a pit, but they
discovered {89} some years after that this was but a way-station on
the direct road to the Viceroyship of Egypt, and they saw what became
of his dream.

When Napoleon the First wished to hinder the Huguenot Church, he gave
it a small stipend in order to retain hold of it. He appropriated just
enough to keep it a cripple. When the State of Georgia thought the
education of the Negro was becoming too marked, it reversed the policy
of the far-seeing Bonaparte and took its hands off. We have never
thought that Napoleon was a truly good man, but we do believe that he
had a larger idea of the philosophy of control than the author of the
Glenn Bill. If the State had held on, it might have hindered, but it
has lost its hold.

     *     *     *     *     *

Would it not sound well to the American people to have it said that in
the United States of America, in the year 1888, our missionaries were
imprisoned for reading the Bible to a heathen tribe of Indians who
lived remote from civilization, the crime of it being that it was read
in the only language which they could understand?

Yet "the orders are," writes a missionary, "that we shall hold only
two services on a Sunday and two during the week, and that we shall
cease to read the Bible in the Indian homes." This is the Government
authority of the great and free United States, but is there any
authority greater than God?

     *     *     *     *     *

In an eloquent address at the Old South Church in Boston, on Sunday,
March 4th, George W. Cable accentuated in strong words the work in
which we are engaged. "Here is the mightiest, the widest, the most
fruitful, the most abundant, the most prolific, missionary field that
was ever opened to any Christian people."

We quote from his address:

  The benevolence of Northern men and women, yea, and even of
  Northern children, helped to establish in the South these
  missionary colleges, these educational missions, wherein not the
  black man alone, not the black woman alone, but every one who was
  qualified with orderly behavior and a rational intellect might
  come, and get, not only an education, but a Christian education,
  and not only a Christian education, but a Christian American
  education. These institutions, standing out in the darkness when
  nothing else stood by them, when the land was racked and torn and
  bled afresh under the agonies of reconstruction, these institutions
  began and carried on the blessed work of raising up leaders,
  intellectual leaders, among the black people, for the guidance and
  stimulation of the colored race toward the aspirations of American
  citizenship and Christian intelligence.

  These institutions, these missionary colleges in the South, have
  carried the torch of liberty, these have upheld it, these have
  taught American citizenship, these have given to the Southern
  States 16,000 colored teachers, when nobody else would teach the
  poor black boy--nay, or the poor white boy either. Seven millions
  of people concerned in the matter, and the National Bureau of
  Public Education reporting year after year that {90} the reason why
  there are 600,000 colored youth out of the public schools, is not
  because they don't want to go, but because there are not
  school-houses and school teachers.

  Here is the mightiest, the widest, the most fruitful, the most
  abundant, the most prolific, missionary field that was ever opened
  to any Christian people. It is right here at your doors. It is not
  across the Pacific Ocean and it is not down yonder around the Cape
  of Good Hope. Right here at our doors is the greediest people for
  education and the gospel there is on the face of this earth, not
  counted among our white race. I suppose that ninety-nine
  one-hundredths of those who generously give to this cause believe
  to-day that it is being given to in generous proportion. Ah! you
  never figured on it. Why, if you knew the national value of this
  work, to say nothing of its gospel value, you would quadruplicate
  it before the year is out. You would not submit to it for a moment,
  as citizens, not merely as members of Christ's Church.

     *     *     *     *     *

The American Missionary Association is called again to mourn the
decease of one of its officers. Hon. Alfred S. Barnes, a member of its
Executive Committee, after an illness extending over five months, at
his residence in Brooklyn, finished his earthly life on Friday,
February 17th, at the age of seventy-one years. Mr. Barnes was elected
on the Executive Board of the A.M.A. nineteen years ago, and had
served in that capacity continuously up to the day of his death. He
was a wise counsellor, large-minded in his views and honorable in his
spirit, known throughout the land as one of the foremost publishers in
the country, largely interested in educational work, and yet he found
time for an earnest devotion to various enterprises in the Christian
church. His fidelity and helpfulness in the service of the A.M.A. are
fully known only to those who were associated with him. Many
organizations of missionary and Christian work will miss his presence
and the help of his generous stewardship, but none will feel his
departure more truly than the American Missionary Association, which
has lost its President, one of its Secretaries, and this long-honored
member of its Executive Board within the last half-year. The greatness
of his work in our service will be remembered and cherished.

     *     *     *     *     *

We acknowledge among our exchanges, the _Fisk Herald_, published at
Nashville; the _Atlanta Bulletin_; the _Olio_, of Straight University; the
_Tougaloo Quarterly_; the _Head and Hand_, of Le Moyne Normal Institute at
Memphis; the _Helping Hand_, of Sherwood, Tenn.; _Our Work_, of Talladega
College; the _Howard University Reporter_, of Washington; the _Word
Carrier_, of Santee Agency, and _Iapi Oahe_, of Santee Agency; also the
_Christian Aid_, published by our church in Dallas; the _Beach Record_,
(occasional) by our school in Savannah.

Several of these papers are models of their kind, publishing original
articles written by the students and professors, and printed by the
students with superior typographical skill. As indicators of progress,
they are full {91} of interest, apart from the items of local school
and church intelligence with which they are freighted.

     *     *     *     *     *

We commend to our readers, "The Missionary Review of the World,"
edited jointly by Rev. J.M. Sherwood, D.D., of New York, and Rev. A.T.
Pierson, D.D., of Philadelphia.

One rises from its pages as if he had been breathing Christian ozone.
The editorials are upon living topics and issues, and are vigorously
presented. The "Review" sweeps its vision over the entire world and it
not only sees, but knows how to tell what it sees. If the high
standard of literary excellence so far sustained can be continuously
held, we shall have a magazine of missions which will be the peer of
our best literary monthlies in quality and interest.

     *     *     *     *     *

We congratulate the Congregational Sunday-School and Publishing
Society on the acceptance of its appointment of Rev. Geo. M. Boynton
as its Secretary. We have known him as a member of the Executive
Committee of the American Missionary Association, as editor of THE
AMERICAN MISSIONARY, as a pastor, as a secretary of Associations and
Conferences, as a wise counsellor and genial brother. We regard him as
eminently fitted for the place to which he has been called. To Brother
Boynton we extend most cordially a welcome to the honorable, the
fraternity of the Secretaries.

     *     *     *     *     *

The fifth annual report of the Executive Committee of the Indian
Rights Association, written by Mr. James B. Harrison, is a strong and
valuable contribution to the literature of Indian rights and wrongs,
which should be considered by every friend of the Red Man. Respecting
the orders of the Indian office at Washington which abridge the
liberty of religious teaching, this report characterizes them as
"unintelligent, arbitrary, despotic and unstatesmanlike, merely a blow
at missionary work. There is no reason to suppose that a single Indian
anywhere will ever learn ten words more of English by reason of these
orders. There is, indeed, no provision made by the Government for any
increase of facilities in the study of English. The damage to the
missionary work produced by these orders is their sole result. The
orders should be distinctly and wholly revoked and withdrawn. It is
not necessary that the missionaries and churches should submit. If
they will publish the facts fully these orders will be revoked. The
facts must come to light. Then the people of the country will have
something to say."

The above quotation will give our readers the flavor of the pages.
"Plain words are best," and it is time that the country should have
them. {92} No one can read the statements in this able Report without
having his heart stirred with honest indignation at the condition of
Indian affairs, through the unfortunate unfitness of the Government
Bureau.

     *     *     *     *     *

 SPECIMENS OF SCHOOL ENDEAVOR.

   THREE COMPOSITIONS.

     LETHER.

Lether is mad from the hide of animals. They first kill the animal
then the hide is sent to a tan yard and there it is tan are made
lether from, then to a shoemaker's shop where it is made into boots
shoes saddles. The finest of gloves is the kid skin glove, that is all
I will say about kid skin gloves. Most of the bad boots and shoes we
have is horse lether or mule lether, that is all I will say about mule
lether and horse lether. All the good boots and shoes we have is young
calf lether, that is all I will say about young calf lether.

All the boots shoes and every thing else we have made of lether is
second thing because some poor animal was rob-ed of his coat that we
might have boots and many other things.

----, aged 16.

     NETELY.

Netely are clean always and handsome to everybody. It are good in the
cite of God and man for it are a good thing to be netely always for it
make a man look netely. If we all are netely it are a good thing to be
clean for it are a good thing in the time of life so to be. Netely is
deserving of everybody and grate with all mankind. It are a good thing
to be netely for it is beautiful and pretty. It are correct always and
never rong to nobody an it make a man feel better when he are netely
an a nice looking person when he are netely are clean before every
body.

----, aged 25.

     DRIVE WAGGON.

That the kind of work I likes to do. When I drive waggon I rides a
plenty. Riding are a good thing because when folks is sick it are good
for the helt. I likes to drive it because I have been loadin it. This
summer I hall fody. When I would load the barn yard wagon full of fody
it would be high from the groun, that is nice but sometimes it would
turn over, that would be truble. Truble are a bad thing.

----, aged 17.

     *     *     *     *     *

   ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS AT AN EXAMINATION OF TEACHERS IN GEORGIA.

_What is writing?_

"Writing is the Representation of the human voice on the 11th part of
a noun."
{93}

_How long since writing was invented?_

"From the creation of the world, or from the birth of Christ."

_What are the chief products of the State of Georgia?_

"The chief products are Agriculture, Turpentine, rail-roads, lumber
and grate deel of merchandice bussyness."

     *     *     *     *     *

 A SERIOUS ALARM IN GEORGIA.

The American Missionary is not published for the entertainment of its
readers. It has a more serious purpose. It speaks for races who have
suffered grievous wrongs, and for peoples whose condition is
exceedingly sad. It has to do with tragic facts, and much of what it
has to say must excite compassion, and must appeal both to the
consciences of our readers and to their sense of duty. To call upon
those whom God has blessed, to insert themselves into the woes and
spiritual wants of others who need their help, is grave and serious.

This is one feature. There are others. The joy of the work and the joy
of the worker, which we are called to record, are a relief to the
stories of necessity, and are like beautiful pictures painted upon the
dark background. When "Our eyes have seen the glory of the coming of
the Lord," we can for the time forget the darkness upon which the
light shines, and sing our hallelujahs. If it is saddening to tell of
the night, it is cheering to mark the fact that the providences of God
are working out his promises, and are surely bringing in God's day.

Over and above the evils to which we must call earnest heed, the
dangers which are not far away, and the exigencies of the cause of
Christ, we are sure that no one can read the MISSIONARY without being
cheered and quickened in gratitude to God for what he is graciously
doing for his needy ones through his people.

     *     *     *     *     *

With the serious duty on the part of those who are working together
with God for the salvation of men, there drift along in the current of
his providences certain incidents that are exceedingly droll.

As we have seen some very ludicrous manifestations of character and
conduct in the terrible struggles of a battlefield, and have brushed
aside our tears at times for an irrepressible _bon mot_ in a hospital,
so in the weighty and solemn considerations which continually appeal
to us, and while we are anxiously asking how we can make the most
bricks for the Lord's building with the least straw, incidents arise
which not only throw light upon our serious work, but which are
irresistibly amusing.

     *     *     *     *     *

We think we should share with our readers a recent one which, when
{94} we read it in the detail, impossible to be repeated here, made us
smile. Every time we re-perused it we thought it, as _Alice in
Wonderland_ said, "curiouser and curiouser."

Our readers are not strangers to the name and fame of the leading
editor of the chief paper in Georgia. They have heard of him as an
eloquent orator with a brilliant imagination which saw a New South in
almost millennial array, and told of it with an enthusiasm so
contagious that to the sons of the Pilgrims after the fulness of a
great dinner it seemed that the "Promised day of Israel" had at last
arrived. It is true that when this dinner had been thoroughly
digested, certain ones, removed from the afflatus of the occasion
began to ask, "Are these things so?" And when the Glenn Bill sought
the endorsement of public opinion, and substantially received it with
no word of reprobation from the eloquent orator and editor, some
recalled the speech of Sheridan in reply to Mr. Dundas, "The right
honorable gentleman is indebted to his imagination for his facts."

     *     *     *     *     *

In all this time no one suspected the _Atlanta Constitution_ of
possessing the humorous character which it has lately revealed. In
late issues of February it has, in the garb of gravity, about two
columns that are ridiculously funny.

It appears that Prof. Sumner Salter, a graduate of Amherst College, a
son of an honored pastor of Iowa, a musical director of exceptional
gifts and a teacher of eminent ability, was solicited by parties in
Atlanta to take his residence there in the interest of the musical
cultivation of such as could secure his services. He soon attracted
the patronage of society, and all went smoothly until the tempter
came. Alas, there was a serpent in Eden, so there was a skeleton in
the closet of the _Atlanta Constitution_. It was a dreadful skeleton.
The _Constitution_ seriously publishes the fact that "it was whispered
about for some time," until patience ceased to be a virtue, when it
sent a guardian of public safety in the form of a reporter to
investigate. "Was it really true that a white man who was giving music
lessons to white people was also teaching a colored class at another
time and place? If so, what about the New South? The black man had no
business to be black, but he _was_ all the same, and being so what right
had Prof. Salter to teach _colored_ people to sing? Let the matter be
thoroughly searched out. The reporter departed on his mission, with a
countenance more in sorrow than in anger, and returned _vice versa_.

  "'Tis true, 'tis pity,
  And pity 'tis 'tis true."

The professor was actually doing this very absurd thing. He had taken
charge of a colored class in the church of which Rev. Evarts Kent is
minister and was teaching them how rightly to use the talents with
which God had so richly endowed them.
{95}

Accordingly, in the year of grace 1888, the _Atlanta Constitution_
publishes the astounding fact, and calls the world to heed it, in
conspicuous head lines:--

  "WHITE OR BLACK--A PROMINENT MUSICIAN WHO TEACHES BOTH COLORS--HIS
  BUSINESS SAID TO BE INJURED."

Then followed the whole sad story. The musician had been interviewed
and investigated. He did not deny the serious charge to this
superintendent of public proprieties. With a heart as hard as old
Pharaoh's he proposed to go on and do more likewise. In short, the
representative of the _Constitution_ could do nothing with this
intractable professor. Hence "he did not stand upon the order of his
going, but went at once," and reported that "_according to Mr. Suiter's
own statement, he is teaching a colored class_, and he has lost a white
pupil, which shows that his course is hurting his business." "Diligent
inquiry has failed to bring to light any proof that he has notified
his _white_ pupils that he is teaching _colored_ people."

Leaving out the meanness of this, has anyone read anything published
lately more ridiculous? It is not necessary to quote the professor's
public reply. It simply claimed the right of manhood and common sense,
and doubtless left the _Constitution_ wondering how a man capable of
making it appear so foolish could yet descend to such depths of
ignominy as to teach people whose ancestors came from Africa, the
unpardonable sin of singing praises to the Author of their being. To
what deeps some will descend! Why should colored people add to the
criminality of being born black, the fearful temptation of pay in
advance to one who could teach them while he had pupils who had the
merit of having been born white?

This was really transpiring in the city of Atlanta several days in the
month of February in the year 1888, and was in successive issues of
the _Constitution_, which shows among other things that there is
latitude, if not longitude, at a Brooklyn New England dinner.
Meanwhile we think we hear Uncle Rastus quoting the prophecy, "The
morning cometh and also the night," but he can't help laughing because
it is "awful funny."

     *     *     *     *     *

 THE EDUCATIONAL WORK IN THE SOUTH.

BY REV. W.F. SLOCUM.

We may remember at the outset that in this matter of the education of
the Negro we are treating a question which must be considered, to a
certain extent, ethnically. We are dealing with a people with race
peculiarities: but it seems to me that it is very useless to ask
whether we are training an inferior stock. There was a time when the
Anglo-Saxon stock was far inferior {96} to its present condition. We
ourselves are not enough removed from heathenism and barbarism to
become very pharisaical.

Here is a race with its idiosyncrasies, and its peculiar latent
possibilities, which we cannot know until Christian education has
unfolded them through many years. We ought not to wonder that in many
respects this people is yet in its moral and intellectual infancy; but
who dares say that it has not a future before it, with its statesmen,
its poets, its painters, its men of letters; that it is not to have
its own peculiar literature, its art, and even its own characteristic
religious expression, just as marked and important as those produced
by any other race? Certainly we have as much reason for believing it
as that the Teutonic race of the second century should produce its
Goethe and its Schiller, its Kant and its Hegel, its Luther and its
Melanchthon; or that the Frank of the fifth century should develop its
Victor Hugo, its Lamartine, its Madam de Stael; or that out of the
barbarism, the cannibalism, the paganism of Norseman, Briton and
Saxon, there should come Shakespeare, Spencer, Macaulay, Browning and
Gladstone. And we may not have to wait as long; for in spite of
slavery's binding chain thrice drawn round his soul, the American
Negro has been absorbing during the past from a civilization which has
been fitting him somewhat for the large Christian movement of the
present. We are working for a people which in all probability will
form at least one-eighth of our whole population; and we have the
problem of lifting them as a race up into Christian enlightenment. The
dark skin is growing darker. There will be less and less of
intermixture of blood between the two races. Hence all study of this
educational question must have in view the large moral and
intellectual enterprise of dealing with a race as a race. I believe
that there is nothing in all history to compare with this opportunity
which has come to our very doors. Here is a nation in our land and
with it every perplexity, every difficulty, every embarrassment, and
also every encouragement, every hope, and every inspiration for work,
that can appeal to any foreign missionary. Here is this God-given task
laid at our very thresholds and with all the sentiments of patriotism
and Christian devotion urging us to our large privilege.

What the race needs now is right leadership, and for many years to
come we are to equip men and women religiously and intellectually,
who, in home, in church, in social and business life, will be moral
and social leaders. And by this power of leadership I mean something
far other than those foolish conceits which have taken possession of a
few who have touched only the surface of the new life that is coming
to this people.

I have rather in mind leaders who shall have that moral and
intellectual fitness which produces reverence, earnestness and
humility, leaders who can draw their people away from their
foolishness, weakness and self-consciousness into the larger life that
is possible for them. Without a {97} doubt, what is needed is true
leaders, and I wish to show where these leaders are now demanded.

Before the war, the South knew nothing of the benefits of public
schools, and the private school was in harmony with its social and
political conceptions; but of late, and especially during the last
decade, a remarkable change has taken place which is doing as much to
affect the whole Southern problem as anything that has occurred there
during half a century. It is a movement in the South, which, however
imperfectly it has been developed as yet, has come to remain, and will
ultimately affect every institution, social, political and religious,
in our section of the country.

_It is now being recognized in every Southern State that free
government is based upon a public common-school system_. It has taken
two decades to incorporate this public school policy upon Southern
institutions, but it has now the evidence of permanency and it is
offering to Christian philanthropy an unparalleled opportunity, such
as God seldom gives to any people, and one which should rally the
churches as never before in support of the great enterprises of the
American Missionary Association.

There has been forced upon the New South the conclusion that the best
way to increase its wealth is to increase the number of educated,
intelligent producers, and with this conclusion it realizes that it
cannot afford to let two million colored children grow up in hopeless
illiteracy. It perceives that its very institutions will be imperiled
by such a condition. I have through personal interviews with leading
educators in a recent trip through the South, by correspondence and by
a careful examination of documents and reports from nearly all the
Southern States, undertaken to find just what is being done at the
present time in the public colored schools of the South.

The significance of this public school movement will be understood
when it is remembered that the acceptance of the idea that the
constitution of a free State rests on universal education, marks a
great change in theory; that this has come against the opinions of the
old Bourbon party, which never forgets, and, it is to be feared, never
learns; whose political economy is represented by the expression,
"keep the negro down"; which regards his enfranchisment as a political
outrage and his education as a mistake and a failure; that it has
risen in the face of the poverty of the South and in the midst of its
most intense prejudices. For when the new educational movement began,
the property and a large part of the intelligence belonged to the
opponents of the new educational policy, but now, in the words of a
prominent Southern gentleman: "The conviction has become very deep
that in the altered condition of our people the only hope left us is
to do all that can be done towards elevating the masses irrespective
of race." This certainly represents a tremendous transformation.
Without stopping to trace the causes that produced it, or even the
large place the American Missionary Association work has in it, let me
simply quote from {98} a Southern Christian man, whose sympathies are
full of prejudice against the North, but who has wakened with the
awakening of the New South.

Writing of the educational movement, in a recent book, he says: "Not a
few of the best men and women of the North have come to teach in these
institutions for colored youth: their motives and their work have not
always been understood, but the Great Day will make manifest how they
have been constrained by the love of Christ, to spend years in work
which has had many discouragements." ('The New South' by J.C.C.
Newton.) A few statistics may give some general idea of the extent of
this movement.

The State of Alabama has 104,150 colored pupils enrolled in the public
schools. It pays an average of $25.97 per month to nearly 2,000
colored teachers, and expends altogether $198,221 upon these colored
schools. Georgia has 49 per cent. of its negro school population
enrolled; that is, 119,248. In 1871, this State had 6,664 only in all
public and private colored schools. Its teachers of this race now
number 2,272. 40,909 colored children are enrolled in Louisiana, with
672 negro teachers, who receive an average of $23.73 per month.

Mississippi had last year 154,430 colored scholars. It employed 3,124
colored teachers who receive an average of $28.73 per month. North
Carolina enrolled, in 1886, 117,562 colored pupils, employed 2,016
teachers of the same race, paying them about the same as its white
teachers, $23.38 per month. The colored school population of Tennessee
numbers 158,450, of whom 84,624 are enrolled in her 1,563 common
schools, which are taught by 1,621 teachers of the same nationality. A
county superintendent voluntarily adds: "I should do our colored
teachers an injustice not to speak of them. Most of them are earnest,
zealous workers, doing all in their power for their race."

Turning now to Texas we find that this State has nearly doubled its
enrollment of colored pupils in three years, which now number 62,040,
with 1,696 licensed colored teachers who receive on an average, $41.73
per month. Virginia has 111,114 out of a school population of 265,249
with 1,734 colored teachers who receive $28.65 per month.

That is, in eight representative States there are eight hundred
thousand colored pupils who are now being trained by over fifteen
thousand teachers of the same race. Now the simple but grave question
that every Christian patriot ought to ask himself is, "What kind of
teachers are these, and where are they to come from in the future?" I
asked that question of a gentleman who of all others ought to be able
to answer it correctly and he replied, "Nine-tenths of these teachers
come from the missionary schools, and of these nine-tenths, more than
one-half come from the institutions of the American Missionary
Association." Now we can understand the truthfulness of the testimony
of the Rev. J.L.M. Curry, D.D., the distinguished agent of the Peabody
Fund, who says: "The most that {99} has been done at the South for the
education of the negroes has been done by the Congregationalists. The
American Missionary Association and those allied to it have been the
chief agency, so far as benevolent effort is concerned, in diffusing
right notions of religion, and in carrying education to the darkened
mind of the negro."

Here is the large door that God has opened for us, and through which
we are reaching this people, and in a still larger degree may carry
the truths of the Kingdom of God to them. What they need most of all
is light. Give them that and the question of rights will take care of
itself. When I was in New Orleans last May, President Hitchcock, of
Straight University, pointed out to me in his office a pile of
letters, which, he said, were applications for teachers for these
public schools, and those which he showed me represented the number of
applications which he was not able to fill. And yet he is compelled
every term to turn away scores of young men and young women seeking to
fit themselves for just this work, because there is not room for them
and because there are not funds to care for them.

As to this new movement in the South, I do not conclude that more than
the first step has been taken, exceedingly important as that step is.
Many of the schools as yet are in a wretched condition. The buildings
in the rural districts are small and rudely built, and many of them
are positively unfit to be used as school houses. There are neither
maps, nor charts or other appliances for the teacher's use in his
work, and in fact everything about these school houses is of the most
primitive type. The school year often does not exceed four months, and
many of these teachers are altogether unfit for their tasks.

Are we to think the time has come to withhold our support and our
prayers from this great work? Was there ever such an opportunity
offered to any land as this which is presented to the Christian
philanthropy of our own?

I might tell of the needs of the cabin home life as I have seen them
in these States, how the scholars from Christian schools are the
leaven that is slowly transforming this, the greatest of all human
institutions; how while from one-quarter to one-half of the colored
population is progressing, gaining in education, property and
character, there is another large part of the race that is either
stationary or sinking into more miserable conditions. Are we seeking
for paganism to battle with? Here it is in our own proud land. Do we
want the opportunity of Christianizing a nation? Here it is; and with
possibilities just as marked as those of any people that ever ascended
the scale of intelligence and Christian morality.

The problem of the New South is not merely one of successful
railroads, of busy factories or of paying plantations, but much more
is it one of upright, wise, Christian manhood and womanhood. This is
the work to which we are most truly called of the Eternal Father.
{100}

Nobly has the American Missionary Association entered into these
labors; but believe me, there is a larger work before it than it has
yet accomplished.

     *     *     *     *     *

  THE SOUTH.

 LETTER FROM AN EVANGELIST.

After my return from England for another winter's service in Gospel
work among the people of the South, I began at

  WASHINGTON, D.C.

I had promised Rev. G.W. Moore last winter, before sailing for my home
in England, to assist him in special religious effort. From the very
commencement of the meetings a good spirit was manifest, which
deepened day by day until forty or more persons professed faith in
Christ, young and old being reached by the power of the gospel. One
man sixty-one years of age surrendered to the overtures of God's love
and received Christ as his Saviour. Another of seventy-five years was
pointed out to me as a hardened sinner. When approached he was full of
self and reason, "I don't believe in mourner's benches and such like;
do you think my going there will make me a Christian or do me any
good?" "No, but it will show the people you are intending to make a
start for Heaven, and it will enlist their sympathy and prayers," I
replied.

Finally he knelt with me in the aisle with his head bowed on the end
of the seat while I prayed. Soon the big tears were dropping from his
eyes and he went home that night under conviction. The following night
he returned. He was again prayed for, but went away undecided. The
next night as soon as inquirers were given an opportunity to present
themselves for prayers he was the first to respond, and the sinful man
of seventy-five years had yielded his heart to Christ, and could sing
from his heart "Happy day, when Jesus washed my sins away." His wife,
who was present, rushed forward, and tears of joy ran down their
cheeks. Scarcely a dry eye was to be seen, while above all there was
joy in Heaven over another sinner saved. Deacon R. came to me
afterwards and said, "Why, did you ever see what a change in the man
in three days, and at last how he 'caved in.'"

Ten persons made profession of their faith, in January. Two of these
were teachers in the public schools. There were four conversions in
one family. Since these meetings, many extra services have been held,
with fruitful results. There are family altars where none before
existed. The work in Washington under Mr. Moore is very hopeful. My
next point was

  SELMA, ALA.

which I entered full of hopes as to successful meetings, and was not
disappointed. {101} During my stay there, lasting three weeks, sixty
professed to be converted. Most of these, through the efforts of Rev.
C.B. Curtis and his wife, were formed into a "Children's Band," while
others joined the churches. This is a most important feature in
pastoral work, where the majority of the converts are children. They
need to have something that will help them in their spiritual and new
life and which may be instrumental in preserving them from
temptations, snares and pitfalls, laid to entrap them by the enemy of
their souls.

I never before realized how easily people are led away by false
teachers, nor saw so manifestly brought out the fulfillment of the
Scriptures, [2 Pet. ii, 1] "But there were false prophets among the
people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily
shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall
follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall
be evil spoken of."

A man calling himself a "prophet" and a "faith doctor" had been for
some time experimenting upon people, both white and black, and
professed to cure them of all their ailments. He had been holding
meetings in a cottage weekly, and had gathered many followers, who
were, alas, for the most part professing Christians. He announced that
on the following Sunday he would hold the passover feast, burn the
Bible, and, in plain words, would do wonders, the like of which had
not been heard of for years. Accordingly, on Sunday morning, with a
few of his followers, he came to the house of a Negro, and during the
ceremony commanded a white woman to place her head on the table and
offer herself as a sacrifice. She refused, upon which a Negro woman
laid her head upon the table. He immediately raised an old cavalry
sword and, with one blow, nearly severed her head from her body, and
then commanded that they should "drag her out at once and put her with
her feet towards the East and she will rise after three days."

Soon there was a cry of murder raised; the false prophet was arrested
after a struggle, and he, with a number of his followers, was safely
lodged in the penitentiary, where it is to be hoped he will at least
be kept from cutting off any more women's heads. Oh, how great the
need of faithful men to lift up their voices like a trumpet, and spare
them not, and show to these needy people, so religiously inclined, the
way of truth!

  TALLADEGA COLLEGE

was the next place visited. Beginning the New Year, which is usually
the "week of prayer," for two weeks the "old, old story" was told on
every night among the resident students and scholars. At other times,
services would be held in the Cassidy school in the morning, or in the
afternoon, as school duties would permit. The Theological class, as
well as the teachers and faculty, interested themselves greatly in
seeking to win the unsaved to Jesus. Following out the teaching of the
New Testament, the students {102} went out two and two in the
surrounding neighborhood, calling at the homes of the people,
conversing and praying in the family. They often returned with great
joy to tell of the success and kindness they had met wherever they
went. I am thankful to our blessed Lord to be able to report that not
only forty or more of the young people were converted but also that
professing Christians were strengthened in faith, all promising to do
what God had required of them and to go to their respective homes,
some of them hundreds of miles away, to make known a Saviour's love
and to carry light as far as possible in the surrounding darkness.
While here the Macedonian cry was heard from

  JENIFER.

I went there for a brief service. The first night the church was full,
although the weather was stormy. The spirit of God brooded over the
meeting and five came forward for prayer. The next night still was
unpleasant, yet some of the congregation came several miles, and at
the close eleven inquirers asked for prayers. A brother in the
congregation rose, and, in pleading terms, his voice faltering,
begged, "Oh, brodder, please do stop wid us; see de mourners; see de
work de Lord is doing; please you brodder don't go away and leab us."
After such heartfelt words I could but stay all the week, when sixteen
professed to have accepted Christ, or, as they put it, to have "found
religion."

Miss Smith, at her home for motherless girls, is doing a noble work
here. Rev. J.B. Grant is highly respected by all in the village and
has a good name, which is worth more than great riches.

  IRONATON

was the next place visited. It was exceedingly muddy and dark, yet the
people came out well. At the close of the first meeting the
congregation arose _en masse_ and asked that I would remain a day
longer, which I did.

  MARION, ALA.

I went to Marion with some doubts upon my mind as to the results. The
first evening after my arrival I was very sick and threatened with a
severe attack of chills and fever, but I was helped to strength enough
to preach with difficulty. Twenty-five inquirers asked for prayers.
Some that night became "new creatures in Christ Jesus," and every
night as the meetings progressed the interest deepened and spread,
until other churches were reached by the influence and their services
given up that their members might come to our church and share in the
work and blessing. Every night large numbers of seekers came to
Christ. On one night twelve expressed their faith in a new life. Among
the many inquirers was one who for twelve years had been an anxiety to
her friends on account of her state of mind, and her conversion caused
great joy in the church.

Short morning meetings were held in the various schools in the town,
and in a town-school seventeen seekers found the Lord Jesus precious
to {103} their souls. Up to this time, during two weeks, more than one
hundred profess to have been converted.

I am happy to report that now, with the exception of two or three of
the students, all in the new A.M.A. school have been reached by the
gospel and are rejoicing that God's love has been shed abroad in their
hearts. This blessing can be traced in a great measure to the faithful
Scriptural teaching which Rev. A.W. Curtis and his devoted wife had
been giving previous to my coming among them, prayer meetings having
been held in the church for some time beforehand, and women's meetings
at the pastor's home, led by Mrs. Curtis, thus preparing the way for
the nightly preaching of the gospel. I go next to Mobile.

JAMES WHARTON, Evangelist.

     *     *     *     *     *

  THE CHINESE.

 RESULTS THAT ELUDE THE STATISTICIAN.

BY REV. C.T. WEITZEL.

There are some effects which cannot be put into statistics. A boy's
progress in a study is but imperfectly declared by the monthly report
or the examination "stand." Much of the work accomplished in a Chinese
mission school, is impossible to tabulate. Like the marvelous
clearness of the atmosphere in Santa Barbara on a bright morning after
a night of rain, it quite eludes the statistician.

But effects may be felt, though we cannot represent them by figures.
Go with me some evening through the Chinese quarter of our city; note
the faces of the loungers in every door-way and at every corner. Watch
the expression, or the want of expression, in these stolid, brutal,
repulsive faces of opium-smokers and gamblers. Then step over with me
to the Chinese mission-house two squares away. Before you enter, look
in through the half-open door and take a survey of the scene within.
The room is well-lighted, and contains, among other things, two long
tables, a dozen benches, a cabinet organ, and a few chairs. The walls
are bright with Scripture texts and illustrations from sacred history.
About fifteen young Chinamen are seated at the tables, all reading and
studying aloud in true Chinese fashion. Just as you enter the teacher,
touches the bell. Books are closed and all take seats on the benches
in front of the organ. A Chinese evangelist is present, and while he
makes an impassioned address, accompanied by most expressive gestures,
you are free to study the faces upturned to listen. What a contrast to
the faces you have just left in Chinatown, idly staring at the
passer-by, or, vacant of all interest, staring at nothing! At a glance
you perceive effects which must be seen to be appreciated. You feel
that not only is the whole atmosphere of this place essentially
different {104} from that of the Chinese quarter, but there is also an
essential difference between those who frequent the one and the other.

Socially, intellectually, spiritually, the Chinese mission-school does
its beneficent work. It must be borne in mind that the Chinaman in
California is away from home. He is exposed to all the temptations of
a stranger in a strange land, removed from the restraining influences
of a community where one is known. Subject an equal number of men of
any other nation to this severe test, and I doubt much if they would
bear it as well. The mission school serves the purpose of a strong
social support. So far as possible it takes the place of a home. It
practically separates its attendants into a community by itself. It
does much to keep them from contact with their vicious countrymen in
Chinatown. It does much to bring them into contact with those whose
influence upon them will be good. It does much to furnish a healthy
social atmosphere in which to pass the hours of the afternoon and
evening, which every Chinese servant is at liberty to spend as he
will.

Intellectually the work in the Chinese missions is already far beyond
the elementary stage, and is growing more virile every year.

But everything is made but the means to the spiritual end. Not for an
hour is this lost sight of. The whole drift of the teaching, the
songs, the pictures, the Scripture text, is to make known Christ.
Every evening's lesson ends with worship. For a month or more the
Chinese preacher to whom I have referred, has held evangelistic
services in the Santa Barbara mission. To-day he leaves for points
farther south to do the same work elsewhere.

In no year, may I add, have there been so many conversions among the
Chinese on this coast as in the one just past.

     *     *     *     *     *

  BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

 WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

 CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

ME.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. C.A. Woodbury,
Woodfords, Me.

VT.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. Henry
Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

CONN.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171
Capitol Ave., Hartford, Conn.

N.Y.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C.C. Creegan,
Syracuse, N.Y.

OHIO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Flora K. Regal,
Oberlin, Ohio.

ILL.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151
Washington St., Chicago, Ill.

MICH.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Mary B. Warren,
Lansing, Mich.

WIS.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C. Matter, Brodlhead,
Wis.

MINN.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs. H.L. Chase, 2,750
Second Ave., South, Minneapolis, Minn.

IOWA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Miss Ella K. Marsh,
Grinnell, Iowa.

KANSAS.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs. Addison
Blanchard, Topeka, Kan.

SOUTH DAKOTA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. W.H. Thrall,
Amour, Dak.
{105}

     *     *     *     *     *

 THE BLACK WOMAN OF THE SOUTH.

The Rev. Alexander Crummell, D.D., formerly a missionary in Africa and
now Rector of St. Luke's Church in Washington, D.C., is a native of
Africa, a graduate of one of the leading Universities of England, who
adds to the strength and graces of a sound scholarship, the devotion
of a noble Christian character.

From an address made by him upon the "Needs and Neglects of the Black
Woman of the South," we quote his plea for "Woman's Work for Woman."
Referring to the Negro woman in slavery days, he says:

  "She was a 'hewer of wood and a drawer of water.' She had to keep
  her place in the gang from morn till eve, under the burden of a
  heavy task, or under the stimulus or the fear of a cruel lash. She
  was a picker of cotton. She labored at the sugar mill and in the
  tobacco factory. When, through weariness or sickness, she had
  fallen behind her allotted task, then came, as punishment, the
  fearful stripes upon her shrinking, lacerated flesh.

  "Her home life was of the most degrading nature. She lived in the
  rudest huts, and partook of the coarsest food, and dressed in the
  scantiest garb, and slept, in multitudinous cabins, upon the
  hardest boards!

  "There was no sanctity of family, no binding tie of marriage, none
  of the fine felicities and the endearing affections of home. Few of
  these things were the lot of the Southern black woman. Instead,
  thereof, a gross barbarism, which tended to blunt the tender
  sensibilities, to obliterate feminine delicacy and womanly shame,
  came down as her heritage from generation to generation; and it
  seems a miracle of providence and grace that, notwithstanding these
  terrible circumstances, so much struggling virtue lingered amid the
  rude cabins, that so much womanly worth and sweetness remained, as
  slaveholders themselves have borne witness to.

  "Freed, legally, she has been; but the act of emancipation had no
  talismanic influence to reach to and alter and transform her
  degrading social life. The truth is, 'Emancipation Day' found her a
  prostrate and degraded being; and, although it has brought numerous
  advantages to her sons, it has produced but the simplest changes in
  _her_ social and domestic condition. She is still the crude, rude,
  ignorant mother. Remote from cities, the dweller still in the old
  plantation hut, neighboring to the sulky, disaffected master-class,
  who still think her freedom was a personal robbery of themselves,
  none of the 'fair humanities' have visited her humble home. The
  light of knowledge has not fallen upon her eyes. The fine
  domesticities which give the charm to family life, and which, by
  the refinement and delicacy of womanhood, preserve the civilization
  of nations, have not come to _her_. She has still the rude, coarse
  labor of men. With her rude husband, she still shares the hard
  service of a field-hand. Her house, which shelters, perhaps, some
  six or eight children, embraces but two rooms. Her furniture is of
  the rudest kind. The clothing of the household is scant and of the
  coarsest material; has oft-times the garniture of rags, and for
  herself and offspring is marked, not seldom, by the absense {106}
  of both hats and shoes. She has rarely been taught to sew, and the
  field-labor of slavery times has kept her ignorant of the habitudes
  of neatness and the requirements of order. Indeed, coarse food,
  coarse clothes, coarse living, coarse manners, coarse companions,
  coarse surroundings, coarse neighbors, both white and black, yea,
  everything coarse, down to the coarse, ignorant, senseless
  religion, which excites her sensibilities and starts her passions,
  go to make up the life of the masses of black women in the hamlets
  and villages of the South. This is the state of black womanhood.

  "And now look at the _vastness_ of this degradation. If I had been
  speaking of the population of a city, or town, or even a village,
  the tale would be a sad and melancholy one. But I have brought
  before you the condition of _millions of women_. And when you think
  that the masses of these women live in the rural districts; that
  they grow up in rudeness and ignorance; that their former masters
  are using few means to break up their hereditary degradation, you
  can easily take in the pitiful condition of this population and
  forecast the inevitable future to multitudes of females, unless a
  mighty special effort is made for the improvement of the black
  womanhood of the South.

  "I am anxious for a permanent and uplifting civilization to be
  engrafted on the Negro race in this land. And this can only be
  secured through the womanhood of a race. If you want the
  civilization of a people to reach the very best elements of their
  being, and then, having reached them, there to abide as an
  indigenous principle, you must imbue the _womanhood_ of that people
  with all its elements and qualities. Any movement which passes by
  the female sex is an ephemeral thing. Without them, no true
  nationality, patriotism, religion, cultivation, family life, or
  true social status, is a possibility. In this matter it takes two
  to make one--mankind is a duality. The male may bring, as an
  exotic, a foreign graft, say, of civilization, to a new people. But
  what then! Can a graft live or thrive of itself? By no manner of
  means. It must get vitality from the stock into which it is put;
  and it is the women who give the sap to every human organization
  which thrives and flourishes on earth.

  "I plead, therefore, for the establishment of at least one large
  '_Industrial school_' in every Southern State for the black girls of
  the South. I ask for the establishment of schools which may serve
  specially the home life of the rising womanhood of my race.

  "I want _boarding schools_ for the _industrial training_ of one hundred
  and fifty or two hundred of the poorest girls, of the ages of
  twelve to eighteen years.

  "I wish the intellectual training to be limited to reading,
  writing, arithmetic and geography.

  "I would have these girls taught to do accurately all domestic
  work, such as sweeping floors, dusting rooms, scrubbing,
  bed-making, washing and ironing, sewing, mending and knitting.
  {107}

  "I would have the trades of dress-making, millinery, straw-plating,
  tailoring for men, and such like, taught them.

  "The art of cooking should be made a specialty, and every girl
  should be instructed in it.

  "In connection with these schools, garden plats should be
  cultivated, and every girl should be required daily, to spend at
  least an hour in learning the cultivation of small fruits,
  vegetables and flowers.

  "It is hardly possible to exaggerate either the personal, family or
  society influence which would flow from these schools. Every class,
  yea, every girl in an out-going class, would be a missionary of
  thrift, industry, common-sense, and practicality. They would go
  forth, year by year, a leavening power into the houses, towns and
  villages of the Southern black population; girls fit to be the
  wives of the honest peasantry of the South, the worthy matrons of
  their numerous households.

  "I am looking after the domestic training of the _masses_; for the
  raising up of women meet to be the helpers of poor men, the _rank
  and file_ of black society, all through the rural districts of the
  South.

  "A true civilization can only be attained when the life of woman is
  reached, her whole being permeated by noble ideas, her fine taste
  enriched by culture, her tendencies to the beautiful gratified and
  developed, her singular and delicate nature lifted up to its full
  capacity, and then, when all these qualities are fully matured,
  cultivated and sanctified, all their sacred influences shall circle
  around ten thousand firesides, and the cabins of the humblest
  freedmen shall become the homes of Christian refinement through the
  influence of the uplifted and cultivated black woman of the South."

The above appeal is in the line of our American Missionary Association
work. While we have higher schools and institutions for more thorough
education, which these Negro women need as much as any women in the
world, we are increasingly developing this idea which Dr. Crummell
eloquently pleads.

We remind our friends and those Christian women who are interested in
the uplifting of Negro womanhood, that the American Missionary
Association, the _ordained agency_ of the Congregational Churches for
this work, could do much more of it if the means were forthcoming. The
marked success of the domestic training in our schools at Tougaloo,
Miss., Talladega, Ala., Thomasville, Ga., Memphis, Tenn., and other
points, shows the advantage gained in the twenty-five years'
experience which the A.M.A. has had in its work for the Negroes.

We need the co-operation of all Christian women in carrying on these
Industrial Schools already established, and to enable us to establish
and carry forward _many more_.

     *     *     *     *     *

{108}

  YOUNG FOLKS.

 WHAT SUSIE FOUND AT TOUGALOO.

(SEE FEBRUARY AMERICAN MISSIONARY.)

A roomful of girls of various sizes and complexions, all very much
intent upon their work, and no one thinking just at that moment of a
traveled fairy daughter, to adopt and love as her own, sent by a
beneficent and tender-hearted northern "Fay." I doubt if Susie ever
before saw so many "little women" laboring with needles and trying to
set the troublesome stitches straight and even, to keep the thread
from tangling and the seam clean. The results are far from perfection,
but they are encouraging.

Some of the children _wear_ thimbles, and some set them upon their desks
and _wiggle_ the needle through without their aid. Here is a child so
tiny that no thimble in the box will serve her. She has a delicate
face, with big brown eyes, and her fingers are the slenderest of
appendages to her atoms of hands. Her sister, a year or so older, has
a round, chubby face, with plump, dimpled, brown hands, but these fat
fingers also must grow to the smallest thimble. Here is a quiet,
modest little girl whose five baptismal names, Cynthia Ann Finetta
Bloomfield Celeste, furnish her nothing prettier for every day use
than "Lusty." She could not thread a needle or tie a knot when she
joined the Hope Band, and the second year she wore one of the smallest
thimbles with a bit of cloth inside for "chinking" to keep it on. Here
Susie's sympathies are drawn out towards a thin, nervous-looking
little Frances, who has a hand and foot crippled. She walks painfully
along to her place and holds her work at a disadvantage in the poor
little cramped left hand, but she likes to be there with the others.

Most of the heads are covered with little tight braids, on some heads
standing at every angle, on some laid smoothly down, one braid tied to
another. A few have their curly hair cropped close, and here is a
little girl with a bushy mass overshadowing her lively face. She takes
but a stitch or two until she goes up to the front and holds her work
out for her teacher's inspection. Some time elapses before that lady
can notice it and say, "That is pretty good, Lena; now go right on
carefully." Lena returns slowly to her place, takes a stitch or two
more and repeats the performance. When will the work be completed? O
no, that is the way she used to do, but _now_--

A middle-sized "Topsy" comes pushing rudely forward, tossing her head
and whispering disagreeable things to those she has to pass, and Susy
hopes she will not be brought into any closer relations with _her_, when
she happens to see her tenderly fondling a broken-armed, broken-legged
dollie, while her work is being adjusted, and thinks somewhat better
of her. There are several Lilies and Roses in this growing garden. The
lilies are not white and the roses are not red, but more attractive
and interesting to their teacher's eyes than the black pansies the
flower gardeners {109} labored so long to produce. Their teacher is
fond of flowers and has her windows full, even in winter, but she does
not smile upon them with such a heartful of affection as upon these,
nor can those bask in the light of her merry face more freely. As her
short, round figure moves down the aisle and back, and Susie gets a
good look at her, she says to herself, "Why surely this is Mrs. Santa
Claus! How glad I am!" and it is not a strange conclusion, for her
figure and expression _are_ like the poet's description of dear Saint
Nick.

Here is a girl in one of the side seats a good deal taller than her
teacher. Through the long, bright, warm summer she works in the cotton
and the corn, alongside of father, brothers, uncles, men and women,
boys and girls. Her hands are enlarged and roughened with toil, but
she is taking pains to learn how to do this useful indoor work
skillfully too.

There is a goodly company of these larger girls, but Susie does not
feel any more afraid of them, nor of "the middle-sized bears and the
wee tiny, small bears" than did little Silverhair in the nursery tale.
She doubts, however, if these largest ones have not laid aside
dollies, and thinks she must look among the "leaster" ones for the
little _step-mother_ who will respect her own little Fay-mother's
request to "take good care of her." But when the sewing-lesson is
ended and she notices one and another bring to light a little
dollie-daughter to hug in her arms as she walks homeward, and sees the
sociable interest of all the rest, she feels no further doubt about
the mother-love in all these little Southern bosoms and resigns all
care as to which one shall be hers, leaving the whole question to Mrs.
Santa Claus.

Perhaps some day we may call upon her when she is fully domesticated
in her new home. There will not be many comforts and conveniences in
that home. Possibly when we ask for Susie, her mamma will draw a
little old box from under the head of her bed, as once when I called
upon one of these little girls and asked her if she had a doll. It had
lost some of its limbs and it was dressed in odds and ends, tacked
together by the untaught little mother, but when I set the dollie on
my knee and pretended to drink tea out of one of the tiny toy cups set
forth from the same treasure-box, you could not find a more hilarious
little mamma anywhere, though you should pick out one with all nursery
stores at her command.

     *     *     *     *     *

 A LETTER FROM ONE OF OUR INDIAN PUPILS IN NEBRASKA.

SANTEE AGENCY, NEB.

_Dear Eastern Friends_:--We have had five good prayer meetings during
two weeks, and I am very glad to tell you dear friends that some of
our school-mates said they will try and do as God wants them to do.
And some pray who never did before. No words can tell how I felt one
evening {110} after we came home from meeting. Just before I went up
stairs I asked the Matron if I could talk Dakota to tell my room-mate
about the meeting. The subject was, "What must I do to be saved?" I
told it to her the best I could. After I was through talking I asked
her if she understood all what I meant and she said "Yes." We both
were silent for one minute. I was praying to God in my heart to help
me to help this dear school-mate of mine. Then in a little while she
said, "I believe in Jesus and now I will always try and be a
Christian." When she said that, I couldn't do anything more, I was so
glad that my tears came. And before we went to sleep I ask her to pray
after I did, and she did; this was the first time she prayed in her
own words. It was so dark and I couldn't see anything but I knew she
was crying by the way she spoke. After long time I thought she went to
sleep; but all at once she call my name and said, "I wish tomorrow
morning they would sing in Dakota, '_Ring the bells in heaven, there is
great joy to-day_.'" Dear friends we kindly ask you to remember us when
you offer prayer to our dear God.

Your friend,

----

     *     *     *     *     *

  RECEIPTS FOR FEBRUARY, 1888.

   MAINE, $1,119.63.

Auburn. High St. Cong. Ch. 117.28 of which for Indian M. and 39.74
for Chinese M. 302.85

Augusta. Joel Spalding, to const. HON. WM. P. FRYE L.M. 30.00

Bangor. Central Cong. Ch. 75; Hammond St. Cong. Ch., 2, for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn. 77.00

Bridgeton. By Mrs. Hale, Pkg. Basted Work, for Selma, Ala.

Castine. Wm. G. Sargent, for Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 5.00

Center Lebanon. Sab. Sch. Class., for Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 4.10

Denmark. Box of C., for Mobile, Ala.

East Orrington, Sab. Sch. 2; Miss M.F. George, 1, for Pleasant Hill,
Tenn. 3.00

Edgecomb. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 13.00

Farmington Falls. By Miss Susan G. Crowell, for Freight 0.65

Hampden. Cong. Ch. 4.80

Harpswell. Mrs. John Dinsmore. for Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 7.00

Island Falls. Miss D. Merriman, for Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 2.50

Limington. Cong. Ch. 12.50

Monson. Rev. R.W. Emerson, for Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 5.00

Newcastle. Mrs. Wm. Heath, for Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 1.00

New Gloucester. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. and Box of C., 1.75 for
Freight, for Selma, Ala. 1.75

New Sharon, Cong. Ch. 3.00

North Bridgeton. Cong. Ch. 2.25

Norway. Mrs. Amos. I. Holt, Bbl. of C., for Wilmington, N.C.; ---- 2,
for Freight 2.00

Orkland. H.T. and S.E. Buck, 20; Mrs. Trott, 3; "A Friend," 1 24.00

Portland. "A Friend" (10 of which for Rosebud Indian M.) 15.00

Saco. First Parish Ch. and Soc., to const. MRS. ELLA C. INGALLS L.M.
30.00

Scarboro. Cong. Ch. 5.16

Skowhegan. Ladies of Miss'y Soc., Bbl. of C., for Selma, Ala.

South Paris. by Mrs. Austin, Pkg. Work, for Selma, Ala.

Union. 2 Classes, little girls in Sab. Sch., by Mrs. F.V. Norcross for
Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 5.00

Wells. B. Maxwell. 25.00

Westbrook. Second Cong. Ch. 25.57

Wilton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., for Selma, Ala.

Yarmouthville. Rev. Amasa Loring, for Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 2.00

----. "Friend in Maine," bal. to const. MRS. JULIA A. MERRILL L.M.
10.50

By Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Treas. W.A. to A.M.A., for Woman's Work:

Ladies of Maine 500.00

   NEW HAMPSHIRE, $291.01.

Amherst. Rev. A.J. McGown 10.00

Auburn. Benjamin Chase, for Indian M. 2.00

Candia. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 17.50

Colebrook. "A Friend," Pkg. of Coats, Val. 16.16.

East Derry, First Ch. 18.03

East Jaffrey. "A Friend" 15.00

Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 5.00

Epping. Cong. Ch. 37.00

Goffstown. Bbl. of C., Val. 30, for Greenwood, S.C., 1.40 for Freight
1.40

Great Falls. Mrs. J.A. Stickney, Bbl. and Box of C. and Christmas
gifts, for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga.

Greenfield. Cong. Ch. 15.50

Greenfield. "Friends" for Storrs Sch. 8.50

Greenland. Cong. Ch. 15.56

Hancock. By Miss B.D. Robertson 5.63
{111}

Henniker. By Miss B.D. Robertson 5.80

Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 19.81

Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. ALLEN L. FRENCH L.M.
53.18

Mason. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga.

Nashua. Miss Sarah Kendall, for Greenwood, S.C. 3.00

Nashua. 2 Bbls. of C., for Greenwood, S.C., 2 for Freight 2.00

Newport. Cong. Ch. 40.10

Pittsfield. Box and Bbl. of C., etc., for Marion, Ala.

South Newmarket. For Freight 2.50

West Lebanon. Tilden Sem., Box of C. and Christmas Gifts, for Storrs
Sch., Atlanta, Ga.

By George Swain:

Amherst. Cong. Ch. 1.50

Greenville. Cong. Ch. 10.00

Mason. Mrs. P.S. Wilson 2.00

.----

.13.50

   VERMONT. $174.06.

Bethel. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for McIntosh, Ga. 3.43

East Hardwick. O. Paine 0.50

Fairhaven. For McIntosh, Ga. 5.35

Irasburg. Mrs. J.E. Chamberlin 5.00

Jamaica. Ladies, for McIntosh, Ga. by Mrs. Ellen D. Wild 2.00

Lyndon. Dr. L.W. Hubbard 2.00

Middlebury. Bbl. of C., and 2 for McIntosh, Ga. 2.00

Montpeller. Bbl. of C., for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga.

North Thetford. Cong. Ch. 7.00

Norwich. Cong. Ch., 15; "A Friend," 5 20.00

Peru. Dea. Edmund Batchelder, 3; Rev. A.B. Peffers, 2. 5.00

Pittsford. Mrs. Nancy P. Humphrey 10.00

Post Mills. Cong. Ch. (3 of which for McIntosh, Ga.) 8.00

Quechee. Bbl. of C. and 1.75 for McIntosh, Ga. 1.75

Saint Johnsbury East. Cong. Ch. 6.50

Shoreham. R.H. Holmes 5.00

Stratford. Cong, Ch. 25.00

Townshend. Cong. Ch. (5 of which from Mrs. Anna Rice) 25.53

Wells River. Cong. Ch. 20.00

West Brattleboro. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 15; A.L. Grout, 5, for
McIntosh, Ga. 20.00

   MASSACHUSETTS, $5,925.07

Amesbury. Union Evang. Ch. 4.03

Amherst. "A Friend," to const. JOHN RICHARDS L.M. 30.00

Andover. Rev. F.W. Greene, 20; A Friend, 10 30.00

Andover. Juv. Miss'y Soc. of West Parish, for Indian Student Aid 15.00

Andover. Ladies of Free Ch., Bbl. of C., for Marion, Ala.

Ashfield. "A Friend" 1.16

Auburn. Infant Class. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
Ga. 7.00

Belchertown. Mrs. D.B. Bruce, to const. REV. CHARLES R. BRUCE L.M.
30.00

Beverly. Dane St. Sab. Sch., for Student Aid, Fisk U. 50.00

Boston. J.H. Nichols, A.A. Lawrence and S.W. Marston, Val. Sch. Books
and Sch. Apparatus

Dorchester. Miss Mary A. Tutle, for Marie Adlof Sch'p Fund 0.40

Jamaica Plain. Miss Nellie Riley, Pkg cards, etc., for Straight U.
----

.0.40

Boxboro. Cong. Ch. 15.00

Boxford. A Friend, for Ch., Corbin, Ky. 5.00

Brimfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Student Aid, Fisk U. 10.60

Buckland. First Cong. Ch., for Sherwood, Tenn. 4.00

Cambridgeport. Miss Hannah E. Moore 8.00

Chelsea. Y.P.S.C.E. of First Cong. Ch., for Student Aid, Fisk U. 7.50

Chelsea. Miss E. Davenport 5.00

Chelsea. Mrs. Emma B. Evans, for Indian M. 5.00

Clinton. Young People's Mite Soc., for Indian Sch'p 43.00

Cohasset. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. 31.33

Cummington. Mrs. H.M. Porter 3.00

Dalton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky.
45.00

Dracut. First Cong. Ch. 10.00

Dunstable. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 30.74

East Douglas. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. 49.97

East Weymouth. Ch. and Sab. Sch., for Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 50.00

Georgetown. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. 33.50

Globe Village. Young Helpers of Evan. Free Ch., for Student Aid, Fisk
U. 25.00

Greenwich. Daniel Parker, deceased, by Mrs. M.P. Estey 5.00

Groton. Ladies' Benev. Soc., by Mrs. Caroline Blood, for Freight 2.00

Hampshire Co. "A Friend" 5.00

Haverhill. Sab. Sch. of West Cong. Ch., for Freight 3.00

Hyde Park. Woman's H.M.U. and Children's M. Soc. of First Cong. Ch.,
for Tougaloo U., and to const. MISS ALICE GRAY L.M. 30.00

Ipswich. South Cong. Ch. 20.00

Lakeville. Mrs. C.L. Ward 25.00

Lawrence. Lawrence St. Ch. and Soc. 150.00

Long Meadow. "A Friend," for Indian M. 1.00

Lowell. John St. Cong. Ch., 41.92; "A Friend in Elliot Ch." 5; Geo. C.
Osgood, M.D., 1.50 48.42

Lowell. Ladies' Benev. Soc. of First Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., for
Wilmington, N.C.

Malden. Infant Sab. Sch., for Straight U. 10.00

Manchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 20.75

Mansfield. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., for Wilmington, N.C. 8.17

Middlefield. Cong. Ch. 28.00

Monson. Mrs. Abbie G. Smith 5.00

Neponset. Stone Mission Circle of Trin. Cong. Ch., for Student Aid,
Wilmington, N.C. 10.00

Newburyport. "Friends," for Mountain Work 3.00

Norfolk. Cong. Ch. 2.14

North Abington. Cong. Ch. 5.00

North Adams. "A Friend" 10.00

Northhampton. "C" 100.00

Northbridge. Cong. Ch. 10.00

North Brookfield. Freight on Box to Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 4.60

North Leominister. Mrs. S.F. Houghton, to const. REV. F.A. BALCOM L.M.
30.00

Peabody. Sab. Sch. of South Cong. Ch., for Indian M. 50.00

Peabody. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., Box Books and Christmas Gifts,
for Sherwood, Tenn.

Pepperell. Ladies of Cong. Soc., Bbl. of C., for Greenwood, S.C., 2
for Freight 2.00

Randolph. Collected by Mrs. J.C. Labaree, 30; Y.L. Miss'y Soc,. Bbl.
of C., for Tougaloo, U. 30.00

Randolph. Annie T. and Marion Belcher 10.00

Reading. Cong. Ch. 18.00

Royalston. "A Friend," 10; ----, Bbl. of C., for Greenwood, S.C. 10.00

Royalston. First Cong. Ch. 2.50

Somerset. Cong. Ch. 2.00

Somerville. Sab. Sch. of Franklin St. Cong. Ch., for Indian Student
Aid, add'l 40.00
{112}

Somerville. Winter Hill Cong. Ch., 17.50; Day St. Ch., 10.50 28.00

Somerville. Ladies of Cong. Ch., for Freight 3.35

South Amherst. South Cong. Ch. 6.12

South Braintree. Cong. Ch. 11.00

Southington. Ladies' Benev. Soc., 2 Bbls. of C., for Tougaloo, Miss

South Weymouth. Children's Soc., Bbl. of Christmas Gifts

Spencer. Mrs. G.H. Marsh's S.S. Class, for Wilmington, N.C. 7.00

Springfield. "H.M." 1000.00

Taunton. Union Cong. Ch. 27.50

Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch. 15.80

Waltham. Sab. Sen. Class, for Storrs Sch. Atlanta, Ga. 3.00

Warren. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Student Aid, Tillotson C. & N.
Inst. 42.00

Watertown. Mrs. M. Pryor 0.50

Wellesley. Cong. Ch. and Soc 123.14

Wellesley. Wellesley College, to const. GEORGE W. CABLE L.M. 45.00

Wellesley. "Friends" in Wellesley Col., for Marion, Ala 26.00

West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. 9.00

Westhampton. ladies' Benev. Soc., for Tougaloo U 10.00

Westminster. "Cheerful Givers," for Student Aid, Fisk U 5.00

West Newton. Earnest Workers, for Student Aid, Storrs Sch 5.00

West Springfield. Mrs. Lucy m. Bagg, for Pleasant Hill, Tenn 50.00

Weymouth. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Pleasant Hill, Tenn 55.00

Whitman. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 77.00

Winchendon. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Pleasant Hill, Tenn 20.00

Winchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 19.59

Worchester. Old So. Ch., to const. GEO. R. BLISS and MRS. GEO. M.
PIERSE L.M.'s 61.26

Yarmouth. Rev. John W. Dodge, for Pleasant Hill, Tenn 25.00
-------------- $2,925 07

LEGACY.

Whitinsville. Estate of Chas. P. Whitin, by Edward Whitin, Ex. 3000.00
-------------- $5,925 07

CLOTHING, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

Farmington Falls, Me. By Miss Susan G. Crosswell, Box, for
Williamsburg, Ky

Litchfield, Me. Ladies' Aid Soc., Bbl., for Williamsburg, Ky

Brookfield, Mass. Mrs. R.B. Montague. Bbl., for Sherwood, Tenn

Cambridgeport, Mass. Miss Lacena Palmer, Basted Patchwork

Cambridgeport, Mass. By Mrs. R.L. Snow, Box and Bbl., for Tougaloo U

Haverhill, Mass. West Cong. Sab. Sch., Bbl., for Talladega C.

Hyde Park, Mass. W.H.M.U., of First Cong. Ch., Bbl., Val. 40 for
Tougaloo U.

Roxbury, Mass. Mrs. Arthur W. Tuffts, Box, for Sherwood, Tenn

Somerville, Mass. Mission Circle of Franklin St. Ch., Bbl., for Santee
Indian M.

   RHODE ISLAND, $448.63.

East Providence. Samuel Belden, for Atlanta U 100.00

Newport. United Cong. Ch. 34.68

Pawtucket. "Friends," Cong. Ch., for Indian M. 105.00

Providence. Sam. Sch. of Union Cong. Ch., 50 for Indian M. and 25 for
Williamsburg Ky 75.00

Providence. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc. 131.87

Riverside. Riverside Cong. Ch 2.08

   CONNECTICUT, $2,001.63.

Berlin. "A Friend," 70; The Misses Churchill, 2, for Student Aid,
Tougaloo U. 72.00

Branford. E. Davis 1.00

Bridgeport. First Cong. Ch 129.76

Bristol. Sab. Sch. Class, for Indian Sch'p 14.00

Columbia. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., 3, and Bbl. of C., for Louisville, Ky
3.00

Danbury. "A Friend," for Lexington, Ky. 50.00

East Canaan. Cong. Ch. 5.00

East Hartford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 29.77 and Box of Christmas
Gifts, for Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky 29.77

East Wallingford. Mrs. Benj. Hall 3.50

Enfield. Sab Sch. of First Cong. Ch., for Indian Sch'p Fund 25.00

Fairfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Tougaloo U 25.00

Gaylordsville. Miss Grace Hendricks, for Tillotson C. & N. Inst. 10.00

Glastonbury. "Friends," for Indian M. 217.00

Hartford. Teachers and Scholars, Sab. Sch. of Asylum Hill Cong. Ch.,
12.50 for Santee Indian Sch.; 10 for Atlanta U.; 5 for Chinese Sch.
Cal. 27.50

Hartford. Sab. Sch. of Windsor Av. Cong. Ch., for Student Aid, Fisk U
20.00

Lakeville. Mrs. S.C. Robbins 4.50

Ledyard. Cong. Ch. and Soc 22.77

Mansfield Center. Ladies' Soc. of Cong. Ch., Half Bbl, of C., etc.,
for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga

Middletown. Sab. Sch of First Cong. Ch., for Indian M. 25.00

Milton. Cong. Ch. 5.00

Naugatuck. "Young Friends," for Indian Sch'p 70.00

New Britian. Miss Mary L. Stanley, 9 for Student Aid; Miss Mary L.
Stanley and Miss Daniels, Box of C, for Williamsburg, Ky 9.00

New haven. "A Friend" 10.00

New Haven. Davenport Ch., for Indian M 5.50

New Haven. First Ch., Miss Barnes' S.S. Class and Others. Box for Jones'
Kindergarten, Storrs Sch

New London. "Member of Second Ch." 1.00

Norfolk "A Friend" 4.50

North Branford. Sab. Sch., for Oaks, N.C. 20.00

North Coventry. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Student Aid, Williamsburg,
Ky 24.00

Norwalk. Miss C.L. Marsh, for Tillotson C. & N. Inst 10.00

Norwich. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., for Santee Indian M. 50.87

Norwich. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch 2.08

Poquonock. Willing Workers of Cong. Ch., for Student Aid, Williamsburg,
Ky. 9.00

Salisbury. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Indian M 12.50

Sharon. John H. Cleaveland 5.00

Simsbury. Miss'y Soc. for Freight 3.00

South Coventry. Dea. and Mrs. Kingsbury, 10; Miss Louisa Lord, 5 for
Williamsburg, Ky 15.00

South Glastonbury. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch. 10.58

Southington. First Cong. Ch., for Thomasville, Ga 1.50

Southport. "A Friend" 30.00

Southport. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Indian M 8.92

Thomaston. Cong. Ch. 35.15

Thompsonville. Mrs. J.C. Simpson, 5; Miss Maggie Drigg, 5, for Student
Aid, Straight U 10.00

Unionville. First Ch. of Christ 37.92

Unionville. "A Friend," Communion Service, 8 pieces, for Ch., Austin,
Tex

Warren. Cong. Ch. 21.00

Waterbury. First Cong. Ch. 200.86

Waterbury. Ladies' Benev. Soc., First Cong. Ch., for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
Ga 25.00
{113}

Waterbury. "A Friend," for Santee Indian M. 50.00

Waterbury. Sunshine Circle, for Indian M. 5.00 West Hartford. "S.H.,"
for Indian M. 10.00

West Hartland. Cong. Ch., for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga. 6.00

Weston. Cong. Ch. 10.00

Windham. Ladies' Soc. Cong. Ch., Box of C., etc., for Thomasville.,
Ga.

Woodbridge. Cong. Ch. 14.83

Woodbury. Ladies' Miss. Soc. of South Cong. Ch., for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
Ga. 25.00 Woman's Home Missionary Union of Conn., by Mrs. S.M.
Hotchkiss, Sec.:

Kent. Sab. Sch. of Cong, Ch., for Mountain White Work 20.00

New Haven. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of College St. Ch., for Conn. Ind'l
Sch. 35.00

------- 55.00

--------- $1,497.96

LEGACIES.

Durham. Estate of Dea. Gaylord Newton, by H.G. Newton, to const. HENRY
G. NEWTON, MISS LOIS CAMP and THOMAS R. NOBLE L.M.'s 100.00

New Haven. Estate of Mary Dutton, by Samuel D. Gilbert, Ex. 100.00

Woodbury. Estate of Sarah J. Deming, by Anson A. Root, Adm. 303.67

--------- $2,001 63

   NEW YORK, $1,676.98.

Adams Basin. Mrs. H. Clark 5.00

Aquebogue. Cong. Ch. 11.00

Binghamton. Cong. Bible Sch., for Student Aid, Fisk U. 25.00

Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. of Tompkins Av. Cong. Ch., for Atlanta U., to
const. REV. ROBERT R. MEREDITH, D.D., REV. GEO. F. PENTECOST, D.D.,
HENRY T. HOLT and MRS. ELMA M. STEBBINS L.M.'s 123.00

Brooklyn, Ladies' Circle, Lee Av. Cong. Ch., 22; South Bushwick Sab.
Sch., 12; Daughters of the King, Lee Av., Cong. Ch., 7; Penny Offering
Park Av. Sab. Sch., 5; Mrs. Anna Pollock, 3, for Student Aid. Mrs.
Sarah Wilde, 10; Miss Sarah Hulst, 5; Daughters or the King, Lee Av.
Cong. Sab. Sch., Pkg. of C.; Flossie Bringham, 1; Carrie Strong, 1,
for Student Aid. Ladies' Circle, Lee Av. Cong. Ch., 2 Boxes of C.;
South Bushwick Reformed Sab. Sch., 2 Bbls. of C. and Box of Books, for
Williamsburg, Ky. 66.00

Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. of Central Cong. Ch., for Santee Indian M. 37.50

Brooklyn. Park Cong. Ch., 16.43; A.G. Brinkckerhoff, 5 21.43

Fairport. J.E. Howard 50.00

Flushing. First Cong. Ch. 56.00

Gloversville. Cong. Ch. 235.34

Honeoye. Cong. Ch. 26.00

Kiantone. Cong. Ch. 4.50

Lawrenceville. Lucius Hulburd 5.00

Lima. Mrs. Orson Warner 2.00

Lisbon. First Cong. Ch., 8.51; Mrs. Wm. Sheldon, 1 9.51

Miller's Place. Mount Sinai Cong. Ch. 12.00

New York. Miss D.E. Emerson, for Student Aid, Tougaloo U. 25.00

New York. "A Friend," Christmas Gift, for Williamsburg, Ky. 5.00

Paris. Cong. Ch. 24.00

Perry Centre. Cong. Soc., for Freight 1.25

Riverhead. Cong. Ch. 10.30

Rochester. Mrs. E.R. Andrews 4.50

Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel 5.00

Walton. First Cong. Ch. 69.82

Walton. Cong. Sab. Sch., Christmas Gifts, 33.93, and 2 Bbls. of C.,
etc.; H.E. St. John, 9; Miss Jennie Hull, 2, for Student Aid,
Williamsburg, Ky. 44.93

West Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. 20 of which for Student Aid, Fisk U. 41.00

Woodbridge. First Cong. Ch. 8.37

--------

$938.45

LEGACY.

Waverly. Estate of Mrs. Phebe Bepburne, Howard Elmer, Ex. 738.53

---------

$1,676.98

   NEW JERSEY, $36.91.

Colt's Neck. Reformed Ch. 5.16

East Orange. "True Blue Card," Collected by Mary Brenner 1.00

Lakewood. Rev. Geo. and E.O. Langdon 3.00

Newark. "X.Y." 1.75

Newark. "A Sister in Christ," Box Papers, etc., for Sherwood, Tenn.

Upper Montclair. Ladies' Aid Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl. Of C., for Storrs
Sch., Atlanta, Ga.

Westfield. "A Friend" 1.00

----. "Heart's Content" 25.00

   PENNSYLVANIA, $7.00.

Braddock. Thomas Addenbrook, Box Books, etc., for Sherwood, Tenn.

Guy's Mills. Mrs. F. Maria Guy 2.00

Linesville. M.T. Donaldson 5.00

   OHIO, $407.82.

Austinburg. Cong. Ch. 11.00

Berea. First Cong. Ch. 6.50

Cleveland. Jennings Av. Cong. Ch., 75; Plymouth Cong. Ch., 72.16; John
Jay Low, 20 167.16

Cleveland. Mount Zion Sab. Sch., for Student Aid, Fisk U. 8.64

Cleveland. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., Box of C., for Tillotson C. & N.
Inst.

Medina. W.H. Sipher 2.00

Mount Vernon. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. 19.37

North Ridgeville. Ladies' Benev. Soc., Box Canned Fruit; Cong. Sab.
Sch., Bbl. of Goods, for Williamsburg, Ky.

Oberlin. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 10; "A Friend," 12.50; Mrs.
L.G.B. Hills, 5 27.50

Oberlin. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., for Lexington, Ky. 15.00

Oberlin. Mrs. Vance, for Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky. 5.00

Oberlin. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., for Storrs Sch., Atlanta,
Ga.

Painesville. First Cong. Ch. 27.90

Painesville. Y.L.M. Soc., of First Cong. Ch., for Fort Berthold Indian
M. 4.75

South Salem. Daniel S. Pricer 5.00

Toledo. Miss A.M. Nicholas, for Wilmington, N.C.. 5.00

West Andover. "Friends," by L.L. Coleman 10.00

Willoughby. Lyndon Freeman 1.50

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. Phebe A. Crafts, Treas.,
for Woman's Work:

Burton. Mrs. A.S. Hotchkiss 3.00

Cleveland. L.H.M.S., of Euclid Av. Ch. 20.00 Cleveland. Euclid Av.
Ch., L.M. Soc. 20.00

Columbus. Eastwood Ch., Y.L.M. Soc. 10.00

Columbus. Eastwood Ch., "Family Mite Box." 12.00

Willoughby. Mrs. Mary P. Hastings 26.00

----- 91.00
{114}

   INDIANA, $25.00.

Bloomington, Mrs. A.B. Woodford, for Student Aid, Fisk U. 5.00

New Corydon. Geo. Storz 20.00

   ILLINOIS, $468.20.

Albion. James Green 10.00

Bunker Hill. D.E. Pettengill 1.00

Canton. Cong. Ch. 42.20

Chicago. Sedgwick St. Sab. Sch. 25.00

Chicago. Major E.D. Redington, for Lexington, Ky. 17.00

Earlville. Mrs. Rindell, 1; Mabel Rindell, 20 cts.; Bertie Rindell, 15
cts. 1.35

Galesburg. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Fisk U. 10.00

Geneseo. First Cong. Ch. 145.18

Greenville. Ladies' Miss'y Circle, Box of C., Val. 25

Joliet. "A Thank Offering" 5.00

La Grange. W.M.S., for Chinese M. 5.00

Lake View. Church of the Redeemer 22.55

Lyonsville. Cong. Ch. 5.60

Naperville. Prof. Geo. W. Sindlinger, for Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 10.00

Odell. Mrs. H.E. Dana 10.00

Ottawa. First Cong. Ch. 32.66

Princeton. Mrs. R.D. Harrison, for Student Aid, Fisk U. 1.00

Prospect Park. Cong. Ch., in part 7.00

Shabbona. Woman's Miss'y Soc., 2 Boxes Papers, etc., for Sherwood,
Tenn.

Turner. Mrs. R. Currier 1.00

Wheaton. College Ch. of Christ, in part 28.81

Winnebago. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., for Woman's Work 9.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Ill., Mrs. B.L. Leavitt, Treas., for
Woman's Work:

Chicago. L.M. Soc. of New Eng. Ch. 30.00

Oak Park. Ladies' Benev. Circle 23.00

Rockford. Peter Holman Fund, First Ch. 20.65

Sheffield. Aux. 5.20

------ 78.85

   MICHIGAN, $90.01

Allendale. Cong. Ch. 2.75

Ann Arbor. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., for Athens,
Ala.

Banks. Cong. Ch. 8.70

Cheboygan. First Cong. Ch., add'l 0.97

Grand Rapids. First Cong. Ch. 25.50

Hopkins. First Ch. 6.50

Laingsburg. Cong. Ch. 4.50

Lansing. Cong. Ch. 7.00

Northville. D. Pomeroy 5.00

Salem. Miss'y Soc. of Second Cong. Ch., for Athens, Ala. 5.59

South Haven. First Cong. Ch. 14.50

----. "Muskegon" 2.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Mich., by Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Treas.,
for Woman's Work:

Bay City. W.H.M.S. 2.00

Cheboygan. W.H.M.S. 5.00

------ 7.00

   WISCONSIN, $222.03.

Baraboo. Miss'y Soc., Bbl. of C., for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga.

Boscobel. Cong. Ch. 2.25

Bristol and Paris. Christian Endeavor Soc., 2.55; Ladies' Soc. of
Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., for Thomasville, Ga. 2.55

Brodhead. Cong. Ch. 4.27

Darlington. Cong. Ch. ..7.33

Fond du Lac. First Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., for Storrs Sch., Atlanta,
Ga.

Green Bay. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Bbl. of C., for Austin, Tex.

Janesville. "Friends," Box of C., for Marion, Ala.

La Crosse. "A Friend," 25; Cong. Ch., 10 35.00

Lake Geneva. Mrs. Geo. Allen 5.00

Leeds. Cong. Ch. 5.00

Mazo Manie. Cong. Ch. 7.07

Milwaukee. Plymouth Ch. 40.58

Peshtigo. Cong. Ch. 3.22

Sparta. Cong. Ch. 40.41

Stoughton. Miss Sewell's S.S. Class, Christmas Gifts, for Austin,
Texas

Waukesha. "Friends," for Student Aid, Marion Ala. 15.00

Wauwatosa. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Box of C., for Austin, Texas

Windsor. Cong. Ch. 18.75

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Wis., for Woman's Work:

Green Bay. W.M.S. 9.00

Milwaukee. W.H.M.U., Grand Av. Ch. 25.00

Stoughton. Sab. Sch. Birthday Box 1.60

------- 35.60

   IOWA, $204.31

Burlington. Mercy Lewis, for Chinese M. 0.50

Cedar Rapids. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., Birthday Offerings 1.97

Cherokee. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for Student Aid, Straight U. 10.00

Chester Center. Cong. Ch. 9.85

Danville. L. Mix 5.00

Denmark. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. 14.50 Farragut. Mrs. L.S. Chapin, for
Woman's Work 2.00

Garnaville. Rev. G.M. Porter 3.00

Hull. Mrs. E.C. Davidson, for Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky. 6.00

Iowa City. Sab. Sch., for Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 15.00

Iowa City. Mrs. R.A. McClain 5.00

McGregor. J.H. Ellsworth 10.00

McGregor. S.S. Class, by Mrs. S.J. Peterson, for Student Aid, Straight
U. 5.00

McGregor. Mrs. C.E. Daniels, for Freight 2.30

New Hampton. First Cong. Ch. 12.30

Newton. Wittenberg Sab. Sch. 14.78

Sioux City. First Cong. Ch. 44.00

Stuart. Bbl. of C., for Savannah, Ga.

Tabor. Cong. Ch., for Tillotson C. & N. Inst. 10.00

Tipton. Mrs. M.D. Clapp 3.50

Tyrone. Wm. Griffiths 0.25

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Iowa, for Woman's Work:

Grinnell. W.H.M.U. 3.68

Le Mars. " " 5.73

McGregor. L.M.S. 6.95

Osage. W.M.S. 3.00

Tipton. L.M.S. 10.00

------- 29.36

   MINNESOTA, $220.25.

Brainerd. First Cong. Ch. 12.00

Hancock. Sab. Sch. Miss'y Soc., for Savannah, Ga. 5.00

Leech Lake. C.P. Allen, M.D. 30.00

Plainview. Cong. Ch. 14.11

Plainview. Box of S.S. Supplies, for Corbin, Ky.

Rochester. W.J. Eaton, 50; Cong. Ch., 40.87 90.87

Sauk Center. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. 8.00

Sauk Center. "Little Lights," Box Papers, etc., for Jonesboro, Tenn.

Stillwater. Grace Cong. Ch. 2.92

Wabasha. Cong. Sab. Sch. and Y.P.S.C.E. 27.25
{115}

Worthington. Union Cong. Ch. 21.55

Zumbrota. Cong. Ch. 8.55

   MISSOURI, $236.60.

Bevier. Luella J. Hudelson 2.00

Kansas City. Olivet Cong. Ch., in part 9.05

St. Louis. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 200; Third Cong. Ch., 10.55 210.55

St. Louis. Mrs. R.H. Webb, for Straight U. 10.00

Webster Groves. Cong. Ch. 5.00

   KANSAS, $85.65.

Atchison. Cong. Ch., for Tillotson C. & N. Inst. 5.00

Dover. Cong. Ch. 2.80

Lawrence. Second Cong. Ch., "Thank Offering" 1.00

Topeka. Woman's H.M. Soc., for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga. 75.00

Topeka. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. 2 Bbls. of C. for Storrs Sch., Atlanta,
Ga.

Wakarusa. Cong. Ch. 1.85

   DAKOTA, $5.00.

Sioux Falls. W.M.S., by Mrs. Sue Fifield, Terr. Treas. 5.00

   NEBRASKA, $47.00.

Cowles. Cong. Ch. 2.00

Omaha. First Cong. Ch. (in part) 10.00

Oxford. F.A. Wood 5.00

Wahoo. Cong. Ch., to const. Rev. A.A. CRESSMAN L.M. 30.00

   CALIFORNIA, $62.50.

Riverside. C.W. Herron's S.S. Class, for Student Aid, Tougaloo U. 8.00

San Luis Obispo. Rev. E.N. Bartlett 4.50

Santa Barbara. Rev. Edward Hildreth, to const. PHILO C. HILDRETH L.M.
50.00

   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $70.00.

Washington. "Two Members First Cong. Ch.," for Indian M., and to
const. MRS. SARAH B.A. ROBINSON and MISS SARAH M. ROBINSON L.M.'s
60.00

Washington. Lincoln Memorial Ch. 10.00

   MARYLAND, $393.16.

Baltimore. First Cong. Ch. 105 of which for Indian M. 393.16

   KENTUCKY, $450.86.

Lexington. Tuition 314.21

Williamsburg. Tuition 136.65

   TENNESSEE, $1,126.03.

Grand View. Tuition 45.00

Jonesboro. Tuition, 22.25; County Fund, 40 62.25

Memphis. Tuition 467.20

Nashville. Tuition, 509.08; Rent, 6.50 515.58

Pleasant Hill. Miss J.A. Calkins, 31; Mrs. Shroyer, 1; "A Friend," 1;
"A Friend," by Mrs. Shroyer, 1, for Pleasant Hill, Tenn. 34.00

Sherwood. Mrs. O.N. Alden 2.00

   NORTH CAROLINA, $177.35.

Raleigh. First Cong. Ch., Christmas Offering 4.85

Troy. By S.D. Leak 1.00

Wilmington. Tuition 163.00

Wilmington. By Miss H.L. Fitts 8.50

   SOUTH CAROLINA, $228.62.

Charleston. Tuition 228.62

   GEORGIA, $882.94.

Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition 295.85

Atlanta. First Cong. Ch., Birthday Offerings 1.04

Macon. Tuition 246.35

Marietta. Ch. and Sab. Sch. 1.00

McIntosh. Tuition 58.75

Savannah. Tuition 207.70

Thomasville. Tuition 72.25

   ALABAMA, $706.35.

Athens. Tuition 57.75

Birmingham. Christmas Gift, Cong. Ch. 5.60

Ironaton. Cong. Ch. 1.50

Jenifer. Cong. Ch. 3.60

Marion. Tuition, 130.50; "Southern Friend" (C.W.L.). for Marion,
Ala., 5; Cong. Ch., 3 138.50

Mobile. Tuition 288.90

Selma. "Two Southern Friends," for Marion, Ala. 30.00

Selma. W.M. Ass'n, Cong. Ch., for Indian M. 5.00

Talladega. Tuition 176.10

   FLORIDA, $80.00.

Orlando. M. Marty 10.00

Saint Augustine. Pub. Sch. Fund 70.00

   LOUISIANA, $419.75

New Orleans. Tuition 389.75

New Orleans. M.L. Berger, D.D., to const himself L.M. 30.00

   MISSISSIPPI, $209.65.

Port Gibson. Mrs. M.S. Bradford, for Freight 1.85

Tougaloo. Tuition 206.30

Tougaloo. Rent 2.00

   TEXAS, $127.84.

Austin. Tuition, 123.84; "Friends." 4; Mr. Blatchford, Ag't, 1
Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 1 Webster's Academic Dictionary, for
Tillotson C. & N. Inst. 127.84

   INCOMES, $29.05.

Avery Fund, for Mendi M. 29.05

   CANADA, $10.00.

Montreal. Chas. Alexander 5.00

Toronto. Mrs. Jane Ebbs 5.00

   TURKEY, $10.00.

Van. Rev. Geo. C. Raynolds 10.00

==========

Donations 10,146.59

Legacies 4,242.20

Incomes 29.05

Tuition 4,250.05

Rents 8.50

----------

Total for February 18,676.39

Total from Oct. 1 to Feb'y 29 110,091.90

==========

     *     *     *     *     *

   FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for February 104.41

Previously acknowledged 458.09

------

Total 562.50

======

H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,

56 Reade St., N.Y.
{116}

     *     *     *     *     *

JAMES McCREERY & CO.

invite special attention to the

FURLEY & BUTTRUM

Celebrated English Fine Merino Underwear, in all weights and grades
for men, women and children, for the spring and summer season.

ORDERS BY MAIL will receive prompt attention.

BROADWAY and ELEVENTH ST.,

NEW YORK.

     *     *     *     *     *

Liquid Cottage Colors.

The best MIXED PAINTS manufactured. Guaranteed to give perfect
satisfaction if properly applied. They are heavy bodied, and for work
that does not require an extra heavy coat, they can be thinned (with
our Old Fashioned Kettle-boiled Linseed Oil) and still cover better
than most of the mixed paints sold in the market, many of which have
so little stock in them that they will not give a good solid coat.

Some manufacturers of mixed paints direct NOT to rub out the paint,
but to FLOW it on; the reason being that if such stuff were rubbed out
there would be but little left to cover, would be transparent. Our
Cottage Colors have great strength or body, and, like any good paint,
should be worked out well under the brush. The covering property of
this paint is so excellent as to allow this to be done.

Put up for shipment as follows: In 3-gal. and 5-gal. bailed buckets,
also barrels; in cans of 1/8, 1/4, 1/2, 1-gal. and 2-gal. each.

Sample Cards of Colors, Testimonials and prices sent on application to

Chicago White Lead & Oil Co.,

Cor. Green & Fulton Streets,

CHICAGO, ILL.

     *     *     *     *     *

6%, 7%.

THE AMERICAN INVESTMENT CO. OF EMMETTSBURG, IOWA,

with a PAID-UP CAPITAL of $600,000, SURPLUS $75,000, offers First
Mortgage Loans drawing SEVEN per cent., both Principal and Interest
FULLY GUARANTEED. Also 6 per cent. ten-year Debenture Bonds, secured
by 105 per cent. of First Mortgage Loans held in trust by the
MERCANTILE TRUST COMPANY, New York. 5 per cent. certificates of
deposit for periods under one year.

7 2/3% CAN BE REALIZED BY CHANGING 4 Per Ct. Government Bonds Into 6
Per Cent. Debentures.

Write for full information and reference to the Company at

150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

A.L. ORMSBY, Vice-President and Gen. Manager

     *     *     *     *     *

MUSIC IN THE SPRING

There are yet some weeks of cool weather in which to prepare and
practice music for the concluding concerts and festivals of the
season.

It is quite time to send for our complete and rich lists of EASTER
MUSIC

Now let girls and boys begin to practice the sweet CANTATAS--VOICES OF
NATURE, or FOREST JUBILEE BAND, or MERRY COMPANY, or NEW FLORA'S
FESTIVAL; each 40 cents, or $3.60 per dozen.

Pupils of the higher schools will like DRESS REHEARSAL (50c., or $4.50
per doz.), NEW FLOWER QUEEN (60c., or $5.40 per doz.), or HAYMAKERS
($1.00, or $9.00 per doz.)

Fine Cantatas of moderate difficulty for adults are: HEROES OF '76
($1.00), HERBERT AND ELSA (75c.), JOSEPH'S BONDAGE ($1.00), REBECCA
(65c.), RUTH AND BOAZ (65c.), WRECK OF HESPERUS (35c), FAIR MELUSINA
(75c.), BATTLE OF HUNS (80c.), Send for lists.

For Male Quartets and Choruses:

SANGERFEST ($1.38), MALE VOICE GLEE BOOK ($1.00), EMERSON'S QUARTETS
AND CHORUSES (60 cts.), EMERSON'S MALE VOICE GEMS ($1.00).

Mailed for the Retail Price.

Oliver Ditson & Co., Boston.

C.H. DITSON & CO., 867 Broadway, New York.

     *     *     *     *     *

  Footnote 1: Deceased.








        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 42, NO. 04, APRIL, 1888 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

